eon Ith | oante
On tarlo oftario
/ z
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and
Sterilization of Medical Equipment/Devices
In All Health Care Settings, 3rd edition
May 2013

The Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion (Public Health Ontario) is a Crown corporation
dedicated to protecting and promoting the health of all Ontarians and reducing inequities in health. As a hub
organization, Public Health Ontario links public health practitioners, front-line health workers and researchers to
the best scientific intelligence and knowledge from around the world. Public Health Ontario provides expert
scientific and technical support relating to communicable and infectious diseases; surveillance and
epidemiology; health promotion, chronic disease and injury prevention; environmental and occupational health;
health emergency preparedness; and public health laboratory services to support health providers, the public
health system and partner ministries in making informed decisions and taking informed action to improve the
health and security of Ontarians.

The Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control (PIDAC-IPC) is a
multidisciplinary committee of health care professionals with expertise and experience in Infection Prevention
and Control. The committee advises Public Health Ontario on the prevention and control of health care
associated infections, considering the entire health care system for protection of both clients/patients/residents
and health care providers. PIDAC-IPC produces “best practice” knowledge products that are evidence-based, to
the largest extent possible, to assist health care organizations in improving quality of care and
client/patient/resident safety.

Disclaimer for Best Practice Documents

This document was developed by the Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention
and Control (PIDAC-IPC). PIDAC-IPC is a multidisciplinary scientific advisory body that provides evidence-based
advice to Public Health Ontario (PHO) regarding multiple aspects of infectious disease identification, prevention
and control. PIDAC-IPC’s work is guided by the best available evidence and updated as required. Best Practice
documents and tools produced by PIDAC-IPC reflect consensus positions on what the committee deems prudent
practice and are made available as a resource to public health and health care providers.

PHO assumes no responsibility for the results of the use of this document by anyone.

This document may be reproduced without permission for non-commercial purposes only and provided that
appropriate credit is given to Public Health Ontario. No changes and/or modifications can be made to this
document without explicit written permission from Public Health Ontario.

Suggested Citation:

Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion (Public Health Ontario). Provincial Infectious Diseases
Advisory Committee. Best practices for cleaning, disinfection and sterilization of medical equipment/devices. 3
ed. Toronto, ON: Queen’s Printer for Ontario; May 2013.

NOTES

This document is intended to provide best practices only. Health care settings are encouraged to work
towards these best practices in an effort to improve quality of care.

Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC)

Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion

www.oahpp.ca

Tel: 647-260-7100

Email: pidac@oahpp.ca

© Queen’s Printer for Ontario, 2013

ISBN: 978-1-4606-2736-5

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All
Health Care Settings, 3° Edition
This document is current to May 2013 and includes revisions based on the following CSA Standards:
= Z314.0-13 Medical device reprocessing - General requirements
= 2314.8 Decontamination of Medical Devices
= Z314.15-10 Warehousing, storage, and transportation of clean and sterile medical devices
= Z314.23-12 Chemical sterilization of reusable medical devices in health care facilities
= Z314.22-10 Management of loaned, reusable medical devices
= Z317.2-10 Special requirements for heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems in health care
facilities
= Z317.13-12 Infection control during construction, renovation, and maintenance of health care facilities
= Z8000-11 Canadian health care facilities
New material in this revision is highlighted in mauve in the text.
Summary of Major Revisions:
Page Revision
- New terminology: Immediate-Use Steam Sterilization (IUSS) to replace “flash sterilization”
- New terminology: Medical Device Reprocessing Centre (MDRC) to replace “sterile processing
department (SPD)”
» Recommendations synchronized with Canadian Standards Association’s terminology related
to the term “shall”
1-4 - New definitions: Adverse Event, Contact Time, Exposure Time, Independent Health Facility,
Out-of-Hospital Premises, Process Control
7 - New statement regarding reprocessing equipment/devices used on animals
10 - New information on components of an effective equipment reprocessing program
13 - New requirements related to out-sourced contractors
16 + New information related to variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
17 - Additional requirements for physical space
19-20 - Additional requirements for policies and procedures
22 - New statements regarding goal of reprocessing
26 - Additional equipment/device characteristics that affect processing
29 - Additional requirement to manually clean before mechanically cleaning when heavily soiled
34 - Additional requirements for rinsing and drying after high-level disinfection
36 - New information related to chemical sterilants
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 iii

Page Revision
42 - New information related to immediate-use steam sterilization (IUSS)
44 - New requirements for physical space related to endoscope reprocessing
45-46 - Additional requirements for rinsing, drying and storage of endoscopes
46 - Additional requirements for reprocessing ERCP water bottle and tubing
48 - New statement regarding chemiclave sterilization
49 - Additional information regarding recalls and system failures
50 . New statements regarding 3” party reprocessors for single-use medical equipment/devices
52-53 - Additional requirements for storage areas for sterile items
Appendix - Newinformation on chemical sterilants and high-level disinfectants
B,G
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 iv

PIDAC-IPC would like to acknowledge the contribution and expertise of the following individuals that
participated in the development this document:
PIDAC-IPC Members:
Dr. Mary Vearncombe, Chair Judy Dennis
Medical Director Manager, Infection Prevention and Control
Infection Prevention and Control, Microbiology Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto
Dr. Kevin Katz
Dr. Irene Armstrong Infectious Diseases Specialist and Medical
Associate Medical Officer of Health Microbiologist
Toronto Public Health, Toronto Medical Director, Infection Prevention and Control
North York General Hospital, Toronto
Anne Bialachowski
Manager, Infection Prevention and Control Dr. Allison McGeer
St. Joseph’s Healthcare, Hamilton Director, Infection Control
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto
Rena Burkholder
Infection Prevention and Control Professional Shirley McLaren
Guelph General Hospital, Guelph Director of Client Services
CBI Home Health, Kingston
Sandra Callery
Director, Infection Prevention and Control
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto
Ex-officio Members:
Dr. Erika Bontovics Dr. Leon Genesove
Manager, Infectious Diseases Policy and Programs Chief Physician, Health Care Unit
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care, Toronto Occupational Health and Safety Branch
Ministry of Labour, Toronto
Dr. Gary Garber
Scientific Lead Liz Van Horne
Medical Director, Infectious Disease Prevention and Operational Lead
Control Manager, Infectious Disease Prevention and Control
Public Health Ontario, Toronto Resources
Public Health Ontario, Toronto
Public Health Ontario Staff:
Dr. Maureen Cividino Dr. Samir Patel
Occupational Health Physician Clinical Microbiologist
Public Health Ontario Laboratory
Tim Cronsberry
Regional Manager, RICNs Renate van Dorp
St. Mary’s, Ontario Epidemiologist Lead
Infection Prevention and Control
Shirley McDonald
Infection Prevention and Control Resource Expert /
Technical Writer

Abbreviations ..........ccccsscsssscsssesssscsesssescssesssescssesssessnsesssesssssssessssssssesessssssessssesesssecsssesssecsesessscsssssssecsseesseseee

Glossary Of TCris ..........ccccsssessssssscccceseessssssssecescesecssssssanscesesssesssssssaescesesesessssanseceessesessssssssacsesesessssssssssaseceseee

Preamble.........sscccssscssscessscsssessescssesssessssssssessssesssessssssecesscsssssessssessesesssseesessesesssessesesesecsesessecsssesssessssesssesesseesO

About This DOCUMENT... cseesceseesseseseseeseeseeseeseestestententeatesteateateatesteateateateateateateateassssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssesesees O

Evidence for RECOMMENCAtIONS «0.0... cesses eeseseeeeeesteeestestestenteseesteneeatenteateateateateateateateateatssssessssssssssssssssessees O

How and When to Use This DOCUMENT... cece ests eeeeseesteneenteseeseeateateateatenssssssessessssssssssssenssssssssssssssssesesees O

Assumptions for Best Practices in Infection Prevention and COntrOl ........ccssessecesesesscsssesssesesesesessesssssssssssesseteseseeee 7

|. BEST PRACTICES FOR CLEANING, DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION IN ALL HEALTH CARE SETTINGS.........10

1. General Principles.............sccccccccssssssssssccccseessssssssssceecessesssssssanecesesssessssssscessssessssssssssacssessessssssssssssscesssseese LL

2. Best Practices ..........scssssccssssseccssceseesssessessseeesseescessesessenssssenseesseseescusenssssesseesscesssesseecsssessessesesseessesssseessees LD
A. Purchasing and Assessing Medical Equipment/Devices and/or Products for Disinfection or Sterilization

PLOCESSES.......sccsesssssssssesesessessssssscsessesensssisssscsessesessasasscseseseesessisasssscsssesessisasscseseseessisasssassesesesssseesitisissssesesrsetiticisssseseaees LS

B. Environmental Requirements for Reprocessing Ar@as......cccccccsssssssssssssessscsesessssssssesssesesesesssssessssssesestsvesssssscssses L7

C. Policies ANd Procedures uo... eecescessessesesseeeeeeeeseesseseeseesteateateateateateateateatsateateateateatsatsssssssssssssssssesesssesesees LO

D. Education and Training .......cccccsssssssssscsesssesssessssescsescscscssesescsesescsssusuescacscsesceneueuessacsesescscscscscsveeeasasasscsessseesetatasseses 20)

E. Occupational Health and Safety for REProcessing.........ccsssessssssssssesssssssssescssssssessssssesesesssssessssssessstssstsssseseees 21

F. Transportation and Handling of Contaminated Medical Equipment/DeVices..........c.ccccccssessesestesesteseetesesteseeee 24

G. Selection of Product and Level for REProcessing ........ccscsesssssssscsssesesesessssssssescsessssssssssessscscsssssescsessensesassssssesesseses 24

H. Factors Affecting the Efficacy of the Reprocessing Procedure .......c.cssssssssssssssssesssesssesesesestsssssssssseseststensesssssseses 20

|. Disassembly, Inspection and Cleaning of Reusable Medical Equipment/DeVICES ..........cccccsessessesestesestesesteseees 28

J. Disinfection of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices...........ccccscssescesescesescsseseseesestesestesestesesteststesestessstesesteseareees SL

K. Sterilization of Reusable Medical EquipMent/DeViceS..........c.cccccsesessessessssesesessesessesessesessesessssessesesesessseseseeteseees 3D

L. Immediate-Use Steam Sterilization (‘Flash Sterilization’) .........ccccscssssesessssscssscssssssescsesesesesssssesssssseseststesseesseseses AZ

M. Reprocessing Endoscopy EquipMent/Devices..........cccccsssessssessessssssscsessesessesesssseesssesseseecsussessssessesesusssssssesesesseseeee 43

N. Unacceptable Methods of Disinfection/Sterilization .......c.cccccscsssssssessesescssssesssesscsessesessssessssessssessssessssessesesseseess 4Q
O. Continued Monitoring and System FailUres..........cccsesssseesssscesssssscsesescscsessessscscscseseecsessstsusssacsssssesestssssasststsesseees AQ)
P. Single-Use Medical Equipment/Devices.........c.cccccssssssssssssssessssssssesssscssssssessessssesescsusseesesesnssesssseesssssuesessssesssseseseees DO
Q. Storage and Use of Reprocessed Medical Equipment/DeViCES .........c.ccccssessssessesesescsesseseeseseesestesestesestesestesessenes D2
Il. SUMMARY OF BEST PRACTICES FOR CLEANING, DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION OF MEDICAL
EQUIPMENT/DEVICES IN ALL HEALTH CARE SETTINGG............:ccsssssssecssceseceeesccessesesceeseseeeessesssseeseseeeeess D4
Appendix A: Ranking System for RECOMMENAAIONS .........:ceccescsssessceseesecessesseeseesesceessecseseesessessesseeessessaesersseseree 70
Appendix B: Reprocessing Decision Chart.........cccscssssccsccsecsscescssecsscssssessesecseceesesessessseceesessessssssssessessesssscerssssene DL
Appendix C: Recommendations for Physical Space for REProcesSiNng .......:cscccscsscsssesssesseeesesessesseesessssssecerssssenee 74
Appendix D: Sample Audit Checklist for Reprocessing of Medical Equipment/DeViceS ............ccccseeeseesenereee 7S
Appendix E: Sample Program Audit Tool for Endoscope REprocessing ........scccccscsscessesseeseersessesessesseesecereeeene Ol
Appendix F: Sample Observational Audit Tool/ User Task List for Cleaning, Disinfection and/or Sterilization of
Flexible ENCOSCOPES ........cccescesscssesscesesseeseeesecsssssssseccsecseceecssessessasesssseecseceesesessecssseasceesessessessecseseseaesasseeseasenseesesss OO
Appendix G: Advantages and Disadvantages of Currently Available Reprocessing Options ..........cccceeereee IL
Appendix H: Resources for Education and Training.........cscccccscssscsssesseeseesecsecescesessecessseesesscsssssssessesseesssserseees LOD

Abbreviations

AER Automated Endoscope Reprocessor

BI Biological Indicator

cl Chemical Indicator

CJD Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease

CSA Canadian Standards Association

DIN Drug Identification Number

HEPA High Efficiency Particulate Air

HLD High-Level Disinfection

IUSS Immediate-Use Steam Sterilization

LLD Low-Level Disinfection

MDRC Medical Device Reprocessing Centre

MOHLTC Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care

MSDS Material Safety Data Sheet

OPA Ortho-phthalaldehyde

PCD Process Challenge Device

PHAC Public Health Agency of Canada

PPE Personal Protective Equipment

QUAT Quaternary Ammonium Compound

USFDA United States Food and Drug Administration

WHMIS Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System

Glossary of Terms

Adverse Event: An unexpected and undesired incident directly associated with the care or services provided to
the client/patient/resident.

Alcohol-Based Hand Rub (ABHR): A liquid, gel or foam formulation of alcohol (e.g., ethanol, isopropanol) which
is used to reduce the number of microorganisms on hands in clinical situations when the hands are not visibly
soiled. ABHRs contain emollients to reduce skin irritation and are less time-consuming to use than washing with
soap and water.

Automated Endoscope Reprocessor (AER): Machines designed to assist with the cleaning and disinfection of
endoscopes.

Bioburden: The number and types of viable microorganisms that contaminate the equipment/device.
Biological Indicator (Bl): A test system containing viable microorganisms providing a defined resistance to a
specified sterilization process.’

Chemical Indicator (Cl): A system that reveals a change in one or more predefined process variables based ona
chemical or physical change resulting from exposure to the process."

Chemiclave: A machine that sterilizes instruments with high-pressure, high-temperature water vapour, alcohol
vapour and formaldehyde vapour (occasionally used in offices).

CHICA-Canada: The Community and Hospital Infection Control Association of Canada, a professional
organization of persons engaged in infection prevention and control activities in health care settings. CHICA-
Canada members include infection prevention and control professionals from a number of related specialties
including nurses, epidemiologists, physicians, microbiology technologists, public health and industry. The CHICA-
Canada website is located at: hitp://www.chica.org.

Cleaning: The physical removal of foreign material (e.g., dust, soil) and organic material (e.g., blood, secretions,
excretions, microorganisms). Cleaning physically removes rather than kills microorganisms. It is accomplished
with water, detergents and mechanical action.

Client/Patient/Resident: Any person receiving health care within a health care setting.

Contact Time: The defined time for which surfaces of the medical device are exposed to a chemical or thermal
disinfection process to achieve the appropriate level of disinfection.”

Critical Medical Equipment/Devices: Medical equipment/devices that enter sterile tissues, including the
vascular system (e.g., biopsy forceps, foot care equipment, dental hand pieces, etc.). Critical medical
equipment/devices present a high risk of infection if the equipment/device is contaminated with any
microorganism, including bacterial spores. Reprocessing critical equipment/devices involves meticulous cleaning
followed by sterilization.

Decontamination: The process of cleaning, followed by the inactivation of microorganisms, in order to render an
object safe for handling.’

Detergent: A synthetic cleansing agent that can emulsify oil and suspend soil. A detergent contains surfactants
that do not precipitate in hard water and may also contain protease enzymes (see Enzymatic Cleaner) and
whitening agents.

Disinfectant: A product that is used on surfaces or medical equipment/devices which results in disinfection
of the surface or equipment/device. Disinfectants are applied only to inanimate objects. Some products
combine a cleaner with a disinfectant.

Disinfection: The inactivation of disease-producing microorganisms. Disinfection does not destroy bacterial
spores. Medical equipment/devices must be cleaned thoroughly before effective disinfection can take place. See
also, Disinfectant.

Drug Identification Number (DIN): In Canada, disinfectants are regulated as drugs under the Food and Drugs Act
and Regulations. Disinfectant manufacturers must obtain a drug identification number (DIN) from Health Canada
prior to marketing, which ensures that labelling and supporting data have been provided and that it has
undergone and passed a review of its formulation, labelling and instructions for use.

Endoscope — Critical: Endoscopes used in the examination of critical spaces, such as joints and sterile cavities.
Many of these endoscopes are rigid with no lumen. Examples of critical endoscopes are arthroscopes and
laparoscopes.

Endoscope — Semicritical: Fibreoptic or video endoscopes used in the examination of the hollow viscera. These
endoscopes generally invade only semicritical spaces, although some of their components might enter tissues or
other critical spaces. Examples of semicritical endoscopes are laryngoscopes, nasopharyngeal endoscopes,
transesophageal probes, colonoscopes, gastroscopes, duodenoscopes, sigmoidoscopes and enteroscopes.

Enzymatic Cleaner: A pre-cleaning agent that contains protease enzymes that break down proteins such as
blood, body fluids, secretions and excretions from surfaces and equipment. Most enzymatic cleaners also
contain a detergent. Enzymatic cleaners are used to loosen and dissolve organic substances prior to cleaning.
Exposure Time: The defined period for which the critical variables are maintained within their specified
tolerances in the sterilization chamber.”

Flash Sterilization: See /mmediate Use Steam Sterilization.

Hand Hygiene: A general term referring to any action of hand cleaning. Hand hygiene relates to the removal of
visible soil and removal or killing of transient microorganisms from the hands. Hand hygiene may be accomplished
using soap and running water or an alcohol-based hand rub. Hand hygiene includes surgical hand antisepsis.

Health Care Provider: Any person delivering care to a client/patient/resident. This includes, but is not limited to,
the following: emergency service workers, physicians, dentists, nurses, respiratory therapists and other health
professionals, personal support workers, clinical instructors, students and home health care workers. In some
non-acute settings, volunteers might provide care and would be included as health care providers. See also,
Staff.

Health Care Setting: Any location where health care is provided, including settings where emergency care is
provided, hospitals, complex continuing care, rehabilitation hospitals, long-term care homes, mental health
facilities, outpatient clinics, community health centres and clinics, physician offices, dental offices, independent
health facilities, out-of-hospital premises, offices of other health professionals and home health care.

High Efficiency Particulate Air (HEPA) Filter: High efficiency particulate air filter with an efficiency of 99.97% in
the removal of airborne particles 0.3 microns or larger in diameter.*

High-Level Disinfectant: A chemical agent that achieves high-level disinfection when applied to surfaces or items
in the environment.

High-Level Disinfection (HLD): The level of disinfection required when processing semicritical medical
equipment/devices. High-level disinfection processes destroy vegetative bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi and
enveloped (lipid) and non-enveloped (non-lipid) viruses, but not necessarily bacterial spores. Medical
equipment/devices must be thoroughly cleaned prior to high-level disinfection.

Hydrogen Peroxide Enhanced Action Formulation (HP-EAF): A formulation of hydrogen peroxide that contains
surfactants, wetting agents and chelating agents. The resulting synergy makes it a powerful oxidizer that can
rapidly achieve broad-spectrum disinfection for environmental surfaces and non-critical devices. Some
formulations have sporicidal claims.

Immediate Use Steam Sterilization (IUSS): A special steam sterilization process designed and used for the
emergency sterilization of surgical goods when routine sterilization cannot be done.” Also known as ‘flash’
sterilization.

Independent Health Facility: A health facility or a class of health facilities designated by the Minister under
clause 4 (2) (b) of the Independent Health Facilities Act, R.S.O 1990, chapter 1.3 (hitto://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws statutes 90i03 e.htm), in which one or more members of the public receive
services for or in respect of which facility fees are charged or paid.

Indicator: A system that reveals a change in one or more of the sterilization process parameters. Indicators do
not verify sterility, but they do allow the detection of potential sterilization failures due to factors such as
incorrect packaging, incorrect loading of the sterilizer, or equipment malfunction. See also, Biological Indicator
and Chemical Indicator.

Infection Prevention and Control (IPAC): Evidence-based practices and procedures that, when applied
consistently in health care settings, can prevent or reduce the risk of transmission of microorganisms to health
care providers, other clients/patients/residents and visitors.

Loaned Equipment: Medical equipment/devices used in more than one facility, including borrowed, shared or
consigned equipment/devices, which are used on patients/clients/residents. Reprocessing is carried out at both
loaning and receiving sites. Loaned equipment may also be manufacturer-owned and loaned to multiple health
care facilities.

Licensed Reprocessor: A facility licensed by a regulatory authority (e.g., government agency) to reprocess
medical equipment/devices to the same quality system requirements as manufacturers of the
equipment/device, resulting in a standard that ensures the equipment/device is safe and performs as originally
intended.

Low-Level Disinfection (LLD): Level of disinfection required when processing non-invasive medical equipment
(i.e., non-critical equipment) and some environmental surfaces. Equipment and surfaces must be thoroughly
cleaned prior to low-level disinfection.

Manufacturer: Any person, partnership or incorporated association that manufactures and sells medical
equipment/devices under its own name or under a trade mark, design, trade name or other name or mark
owned or controlled by it.

Medical Device Reprocessing Centre (MDRC): A centralized area within the health care setting for cleaning,
disinfection and/or sterilization of medical equipment/devices (e.g., Sterile Processing Department - SPD,
Central Processing Department — CPD, Central Processing Service - CPS, Central Surgical Supply — CSS). In smaller
settings such as clinics or offices in the community, this refers to any segregated area where reprocessing of
equipment/devices takes place, away from clients/patients/residents and clean areas.

Medical Equipment/Device: Any instrument, apparatus, appliance, material, or other article, whether used
alone or in combination, intended by the manufacturer to be used for human beings for the purpose of
diagnosis, prevention, monitoring, treatment or alleviation of disease, injury or handicap; investigation,
replacement, or modification of the anatomy or of a physiological process; or control of conception.”
Noncritical Medical Equipment/Device: Equipment/device that either touches only intact skin (but not mucous
membranes) or does not directly touch the client/patient/resident. Reprocessing of noncritical
equipment/devices involves cleaning and may also require low-level disinfection (e.g., blood pressure cuffs,
stethoscopes).

Out-of-Hospital Premises (OHP): Premises that perform procedures using specified types of anaesthesia, such as
general anaesthesia, sedation, most types of regional anaesthesia and, in some cases, local anaesthesia. OHP
procedures include, but are not limited to cosmetic surgery, endoscopy and interventional pain management.
For more information see Ontario Regulation 114/94 or visit www.cpso.on.ca.

Pasteurization (Thermal Disinfection): A high-level disinfection process using hot water at a temperature of
71°C (160°F) for a minimum exposure time of at least 30 minutes.

Personal Protective Equipment (PPE): Clothing or equipment worn for protection against hazards.

Physical Monitor: A device that monitors the physical parameters of a sterilizer, such as time, temperature and
pressure.

Process Challenge Device (PCD): A test device intended to provide a challenge to the sterilization process that is
equal to, or greater than, the challenge posed by the most difficult item routinely processed.’ Examples include
BI test packs which also contain a chemical indicator, or Cl test packs which contain a Class 5 integrating
indicator or an enzyme-only indicator.

Process Control: The management of processes and procedures that affect the quality of products and

services, with the goal of ensuring that processes and procedures are performed consistently and as they

were intended to be performed in order to produce predictable output.

Reprocessing: The steps performed to prepare used medical equipment/devices for use (e.g., cleaning,
disinfection, sterilization).*

Reusable: A term given by the manufacturer of medical equipment/devices that allows it, through the selection
of materials and/or components, to be re-used.’

Semicritical Medical Equipment/Device: Medical equipment/device that comes in contact with nonintact skin
or mucous membranes but ordinarily does not penetrate them (e.g., respiratory therapy equipment, transrectal
probes, specula). Reprocessing semicritical equipment/devices involves meticulous cleaning followed by, at a
minimum, high-level disinfection.

Sharps: Objects capable of causing punctures or cuts (e.g., needles, syringes, blades, clinical glass).

Single Patient Use: A term given to medical equipment/devices that may be used ona single
client/patient/resident and may be re-used on the same client/patient/resident, but may not be used on other
clients/patients/residents.

Single-use/Disposable: A term given to medical equipment/devices designated by the manufacturer for single-
use only. Single-use equipment/devices must not be reprocessed.”

Staff: Anyone conducting activities in settings where health care is provided, including but not limited to, health
care providers. See also, Health Care Providers.

Sterilant: A chemical used on medical equipment/devices which results in sterilization of the equipment/device.
Sterilization: The level of reprocessing required when processing critical medical equipment/devices.
Sterilization results in the destruction of all forms of microbial life including bacteria, viruses, spores and fungi.
Equipment/devices must be cleaned thoroughly before effective sterilization can take place.

Thermal Disinfection: See Pasteurization.

Ultrasonic Washer: A machine that cleans medical equipment/devices by the cavitations produced by
ultrasound waves.

Washer-Disinfector: A washing system that removes soil and cleans medical equipment/devices prior to high-
level disinfection or sterilization. A washer-disinfector provides low-level disinfection. Noncritical medical
equipment/devices that do not require high-level disinfection or sterilization may be reprocessed in a washer-
disinfector (e.g., bedpans).

Washer-Sterilizer: A machine that washes and sterilizes medical equipment/devices. Saturated steam under
pressure is the sterilizing agent. If used as a sterilizer, quality processes must be observed as with all sterilization
procedures (e.g., use of chemical and biologic monitors, record-keeping, wrapping, drying).

Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS)*: The Workplace Hazardous Materials
Information System (WHMIS) is Canada's national hazard communication standard. The key elements of the
system are cautionary labelling of containers of WHMIS ‘controlled products’, the provision of Material Safety
Data Sheets (MSDSs) and staff education and training programs.

Preamble
About This Document
This document is intended for health care providers to ensure that the critical elements and methods of
decontamination, disinfection and sterilization are incorporated into health care facility procedures. The
document describes essential elements and methods in the safe handling, monitoring and auditing,
transportation and biological decontamination of contaminated medical equipment/devices.
Information in this document is consistent with, or exceeds, recommendations from the Public Health Agency of
Canada. It also meets standards developed by the Canadian Standards Association and reflects position
statements of the Ontario Hospital Association. As such, it may be used as a basis for auditing reprocessing
practice in any health care setting in Ontario.
FOR RECOMMENDATIONS IN THIS DOCUMENT:
= Shall indicates mandatory requirements based on legislated requirements or national standards (e.g.,
Canadian Standards Association — CSA).
= Must indicates best practice, i.e., the minimum standard based on current recommendations in the
medical literature.
= Should indicates a recommendation or that which is advised but not mandatory.
= May indicates an advisory or optional statement.
Evidence for Recommendations
The best practices in this document reflect the best evidence and expert opinion on the reprocessing of medical
equipment/devices and legislated standards available at the time of writing. As new information becomes
available, this document will be reviewed and updated.
Users must be cognizant of the basic principles of reprocessing and safe use of medical equipment/devices when
making decisions about new equipment/devices and methodologies that might become available.
> Refer to Appendix A, ‘Ranking System for Recommendations’, for grading system used for
recommendations.
How and When to Use This Document
The best practices for reprocessing medical equipment set out in this document should be practiced in all
settings where care is provided, across the continuum of health care. This includes settings where emergency
(including pre-hospital) care is provided, hospitals, complex continuing care facilities, rehabilitation facilities,
long-term care homes, outpatient clinics, community health centres and clinics, independent health facilities,
out of hospital premises, physician offices, dental offices, offices of other health professionals, public health and
home health care.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 6

This document deals with medical equipment/devices that are used on humans. Instruments that contact
animals or animal tissues (e.g., research animals) should never be used on humans and must not be reprocessed
in the same processing areas as equipment/devices that are used on humans.

All reprocessing of equipment/devices, regardless of source, must meet these best practices whether the
equipment/device is purchased, loaned, physician/practitioner-owned, research equipment/device or
obtained by any other method.

Assumptions for Best Practices in Infection Prevention and Control

The best practices in this document are based on the assumption that health care settings in Ontario already
have basic infection prevention and control (IPAC) systems and programs in place.° Health care settings that do
not have Infection Control Professionals should work with organizations that have infection prevention and
control expertise, such as academic health science centres, regional infection control networks (RICN), public
health units that have professional staff certified in IPAC and local IPAC associations (e.g., Community and
Hospital Infection Control Association (CHICA) — Canada chapters), to develop evidence-based programs.

In addition to the above general assumption about basic IPAC, these best practices are based on the following
additional assumptions and principles:

1. Adequate resources are devoted to IPAC in all health care settings. See PIDAC’s Best Practices for
Infection Prevention and Control Programs in Ontario,’ available at: htip://www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-
knowledge/best-practice-manuals/infection-prevention-and-control-programs-in-ontario.html.

2. Best practices to prevent and control the spread of infectious diseases are routinely implemented in all
health care settings, in accordance with PIDAC’S Routine Practices and Additional Precautions in All
Health Care Settings,’ available at: http://www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-knowledge/best-practice-
manuals/routine-practices-and-additional-precautions.html.

3. Programs are in place in all health care settings that promote good hand hygiene practices and ensure
adherence to standards for hand hygiene. See:

a) PIDAC’s Best Practices for Hand Hygiene in All Health Care Settings,’ available at:
http:/(www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-knowledge/best-practice-manuals/hand-hygiene.html.

b) Ontario’s hand hygiene improvement program, Just Clean Your Hands,® available at:
http:/Awww.oahpp.ca/services/jcyh/.

4. Adequate resources are devoted to Environmental Services/Housekeeping in all health care settings that
include written procedures for cleaning and disinfection of client/patient/resident rooms and
equipment; education of new cleaning staff and continuing education of all cleaning staff; and ongoing
review of procedures. See PIDAC’s Best Practices for Environmental Cleaning in All Health Care Settings,°
available at: http:/www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-knowledge/best-practice-manuals/environmental-cleaning-for-
prevention-and-control-of-infections.html.

5. Regular education (including orientation and continuing education) and support is provided in all health
care settings to help staff consistently implement appropriate IPAC practices. Effective education
programs emphasize:
= the risks associated with infectious diseases, including acute respiratory illness and gastroenteritis
= hand hygiene, including the use of alcohol-based hand rubs and hand washing

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 7

principles and components of Routine Practices as well as additional transmission-based precautions
(Additional Precautions)

assessment of the risk of infection transmission and the appropriate use of personal protective
equipment (PPE), including safe application, removal and disposal

appropriate cleaning and/or disinfection of health care equipment, supplies and surfaces or items in
the health care environment

individual staff responsibility for keeping clients/patients/residents, themselves and co-workers safe
collaboration between professionals involved in occupational health and IPAC.

NOTE: Education programs should be flexible enough to meet the diverse needs of the range of
health care providers and other staff who work in the health care setting. The local public health unit
and regional infection control networks may be a resource and can provide assistance in developing
and providing education programs for community settings.

6. Collaboration between professionals involved in OHS and IPAC is promoted in all health care settings to
implement and maintain appropriate IPAC standards that protect workers.

7. There are effective working relationships between the health care setting and local Public Health. Clear
lines of communication are maintained and Public Health is contacted for information and advice as
required and the obligations (under the Health Protection and Promotion Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.H.7)*° to
report reportable and communicable diseases is fulfilled. Public Health provides regular aggregate
reports of outbreaks of reportable infectious diseases in facilities and/or in the community to all health
care settings.

8. Access to ongoing IPAC advice and guidance to support staff and resolve differences are available to the
health care setting.

9. There are established procedures for receiving and responding appropriately to all international,
national, regional and local health advisories in all health care settings. Health advisories are
communicated promptly to all affected staff and regular updates are provided. Current advisories are
available from local public health units, the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care (MOHLTC), Health
Canada and Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) websites and local RICN.

10. Where applicable, there is a process for evaluating personal protective equipment (PPE) in the health
care setting, to ensure it meets quality standards.

11. There is regular assessment of the effectiveness of the infection prevention and control program and its
impact on practices in the health care setting. The information is used to further refine the program.”

Occupational Health and Safety requirements shall be met:
Health care facilities are required to comply with applicable provisions of the Occupational Health and
Safety Act (OHSA), R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1 and its Regulations."* Employers, supervisors and workers have rights,
duties and obligations under the OHSA. Specific requirements under the OHSA and its regulations are
available at:
= Occupational Health and Safety Act: htip:/www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_ statutes 90001 e.htm
= Ontario Regulation 67/93 Health care and Residential Facilities: http://)www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/regs/english/elaws_ regs 930067 e.htm
The Occupational Health and Safety Act places duties on many different categories of individuals
associated with workplaces, such as employers, constructors, supervisors, owners, suppliers, licensees,

officers of a corporation and workers. A guide to the requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety
Act may be found at: http://www.labour.gov.on.ca/english/hs/pubs/ohsa/index.php.
= The OHSA section 25(2)(h), the ‘general duty clause’, requires an employer to take every precaution
reasonable in the circumstances for the protection of a worker.
= Specific requirements for certain health care and residential facilities may be found in the Regulation for
Health Care and Residential Facilities, available at: htip://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/regs/english/elaws regs 930067 _e.htm. Under that regulation there are a number of
requirements, including:
= Requirements for an employer to establish written measures and procedures for the health and
safety of workers, in consultation with the joint health and safety committee or health and
safety representative, if any. Such measures and procedures may include, but are not limited to,
the following:
= safe work practices
= safe working conditions
= proper hygiene practices and the use of hygiene facilities
= the control of infections
= immunization and inoculation against infectious diseases.
m= The requirement that at least once a year the measures and procedures for the health and
safety of workers shall be reviewed and revised in the light of current knowledge and practice.
= Arequirement that the employer, in consultation with the joint health and safety committee or
health and safety representative, if any, shall develop, establish and provide training and
educational programs in health and safety measures and procedures for workers that are
relevant to the workers’ work.
= Aworker who is required by his or her employer or by the Regulation for Health Care and
Residential Facilities to wear or use any protective clothing, equipment or device shall be
instructed and trained in its care, use and limitations before wearing or using it for the first time
and at regular intervals thereafter and the worker shall participate in such instruction and
training.
= The employer is reminded of the need to be able to demonstrate training, and is therefore
encouraged to document the workers trained, the dates training was conducted, and the
information and materials covered during training.
m= Under the Occupational Health and Safety Act, a worker must work in compliance with the Act and
its regulations, and use or wear any equipment, protective devices or clothing required by the
employer.
= The Needle Safety Regulation (O.Reg 474/07)” has requirements related to the use of hollow-
bore needles that are safety-engineered needles. The regulation is available at: http://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/regs/english/elaws_regs 070474 e.htm.
Additional information is available at the Ministry of Labour Health and Community Care Page:
http://www. labour.gov.on.ca/english/hs/topics/healthcare.php.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 9

|. Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and
Sterilization in All Health Care Settings

TERMS USED IN THIS DOCUMENT (see glossary for details and examples)

Health Care Provider: Any person delivering care to a client/patient/resident.

Staff: Anyone conducting activities within a health care setting (includes health care
providers).

Health Care Setting: — Any location where health care is provided, including settings where emergency care
is provided, hospitals, complex continuing care, rehabilitation hospitals, long-term
care homes, mental health facilities, outpatient clinics, community health centres and
clinics, physician offices, dental offices, offices of other health professionals and home
health care.

Infection is a major risk of surgery and infections related to improper equipment reprocessing still occur, despite
modern technologies and procedures.” Achieving effective disinfection and sterilization is essential for ensuring that
medical and surgical equipment/devices do not transmit infectious pathogens to clients/patients/residents or staff.
Effective reprocessing of medical equipment/devices is a process comprised of many components (Figure 1).
. Equipment .
Point-of-Use == Purchase ~—y Centralized
Observation Reprocessing
Components Required
Contingencies for Effective
for Equipment Reprocessing Trained Staff
Failures
Written
\ Quality . f
see Policies and
Monitoring —_ Procedures
Figure 1: Components of an Effective Equipment Reprocessing Program
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 10

It is the shared responsibility of each person involved with each surgical instrument or piece of medical
equipment throughout the process of care to ensure that effective reprocessing will take place. Prior to
purchase, the way that a device will be reprocessed must be taken into consideration. Reprocessing must be
carried out in a centralized area (medical device reprocessing centre - MDRC) by trained staff, with monitoring
and quality control parameters built into the process. Contaminated equipment/devices must be cleaned and
then disinfected or sterilized according to defined procedures that are based on accepted standards and best
practices. In the event of equipment failures or emergency situations, there are recalls and safeguards built into
the system to protect the end user. Finally, there should be observations at point-of-use to ensure sterilization
indicators demonstrate that effective sterilization has occurred. All of these components must be in place to
achieve success.
1. General Principles
All reprocessing of medical equipment/devices, regardless of source, must meet this guideline whether the
equipment/device is purchased, loaned, physician/practitioner-owned, used for research or obtained by
any other means, and regardless of where reprocessing occurs.
The goals of safe reprocessing of medical equipment/devices include:

preventing transmission of microorganisms to personnel and clients/patients/residents

minimizing damage to medical equipment/devices from foreign material (e.g., blood, body fluids, saline

and medications) or inappropriate handling.
“Effective reprocessing requires rigorous compliance with recommended protocols.”

Public Health Agency of Canada

Health care settings are required to establish, document and maintain their own policies and procedures for the
reprocessing of medical devices.” Best practices in reprocessing medical equipment/devices must include the
following” ”™*:

adequate review by all parties whenever new equipment/devices are being considered for purchase (e.g.,

reprocessing committee)

a centralized area for reprocessing or an area that complies with the requirements for reprocessing

written policies and procedures for reprocessing each type of medical equipment/device

training of all staff who perform reprocessing

validation of cleanliness, sterility and function of the reprocessed equipment/device

continual monitoring of reprocessing procedures to ensure their quality

a corporate strategy for dealing with single-use medical equipment/devices

management and reporting of medical incidents

management and reporting of safety-related accidents

recall of improperly reprocessed devices

procedures to be followed in emergency situations (e.g., utilities shutdowns, compromised packaging,

biological indicator (Bl) testing failures)

= attention to environmental conditions that might impact on reprocessing.
Decisions related to reprocessing medical equipment/devices should be made by a multi-disciplinary
reprocessing committee that includes the individuals responsible for purchasing the equipment/device,
reprocessing the equipment/device, maintaining the equipment/device, infection prevention and control,
occupational health and safety, and the end-user of the equipment/device.
It is strongly recommended that reprocessing should be performed in a centralized area that complies with
the physical and human resource requirements for reprocessing.
There must be a clear definition of the lines of authority and accountability with respect to reprocessing,
whether done centrally or elsewhere.
It is essential that an overall inventory of all reprocessing practices within the healthcare setting is done,
including documentation as to where, how and by whom all equipment/devices are being reprocessed and
whether current standards are being met, as set out in this document. All processes must continue to be
audited on a regular basis (e.g., annually), with clear and known consequences attached to non-compliance.
Compliance with the processes must also be audited.
As new reprocessing technologies and processes become available, they must be evaluated against the same
criteria as current methodologies. Verify that:
= the process is compatible with the equipment/device being reprocessed
= the process is compatible with the cleaning products being used
= environmental issues with the process have been considered (e.g., odours, toxic waste products, toxic
vapours)
= occupational health issues with the process have been considered (e.g., is PPE or special ventilation
required?)
= staff education and training is available (provided by the manufacturer)
= the facility is able to provide the required preventive maintenance
= the process can be monitored (e.g., there are mechanical, chemical and biologic monitors and indicators
available)
= disinfectant products have a Drug Identification Number (DIN) from Health Canada.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 12

2. Best Practices
A. Purchasing and Assessing Medical Equipment/Devices and/or Products for
Disinfection or Sterilization Processes

All reprocessing of medical equipment/devices, regardless of source, must meet these best practices whether
the equipment/device is purchased, loaned, physician/practitioner-owned, used for research, or equipment
obtained by any other means.
EQUIPMENT/DEVICE PURCHASES
The administration of the health care setting is responsible for verifying that any product used in the provision
of care to clients/patients/residents is capable of being cleaned, disinfected and/or sterilized according to the
most current standards and guidelines from the Canadian Standards Association (CSA), the Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC)/Health Canada as well as these PIDAC best practices. The issuing of a purchase order is a
useful point of control for ensuring that appropriate review of the equipment/device has taken place prior to
purchase.
Equipment that is used to clean, disinfect or sterilize (e.g., ultrasonic washers, pasteurizers, washer-disinfectors,
automated endoscope reprocessors/AERs, sterilizers) must also meet standards established by Health
Canada/PHAC, the CSA“ and the requirements of this document.
If a health care setting out-sources a process to a contractor (e.g., loaners, laundry, centralized processors), it is
the health care setting’s responsibility to ensure that the contractor is performing these functions to the
standards required by the health care setting.”
Decision-making prior to purchasing medical equipment/devices and reprocessing equipment shall involve
representatives from the departments in the health care setting that will use, reprocess and maintain the items
and should include” ™:

Sterile Processing

Purchasing

Operating Room or other unit/department that will use the device

Risk Management

Infection Prevention and Control

Occupational Health and Safety

Client/patient/resident care services

Support services

Physical plant/Maintenance

Biomedical Engineering.
Reprocessing staff, Infection Prevention and Control, Biomedical Engineering and Occupational Health and
Safety must make recommendations regarding the ability to achieve the appropriate level of reprocessing
required for the equipment/device according to Spaulding’s criteria’ (Table 1) and the suitability of the
equipment/device for purchase, after reviewing:

the manufacturer’s directions

applicable CSA standards regarding the equipment/device

Health Canada/PHAC guidelines regarding the equipment/device

PIDAC best practices for cleaning, disinfection and sterilization.

Prior to purchase of the equipment/device, a procedure for reprocessing the equipment/device that is
achievable in the health care setting must be approved by all parties involved. If such a process cannot be
defined, consideration must be given to alternate equipment/devices that can be adequately reprocessed.
If there is a discrepancy between the reprocessing level recommended by the manufacturer and the
intended use of the instrument by Spaulding’s criteria, the higher level of disinfection/sterilization
must be used.
Newly purchased non-sterile critical and semicritical medical equipment/devices shall first be inspected and
decontaminated according to their intended use prior to being put into circulation.” Refer to Table 1,
‘Spaulding’s Classification of Medical Equipment/Devices and Required Level of Reprocessing’ for the level of
processing that is to be used for medical equipment/devices based on the intended use of the
equipment/device.
If there is a discrepancy between the reprocessing level recommended by the manufacturer and the intended
use of the instrument by Spaulding’s criteria, the higher level of disinfection/sterilization must be used. For
example, if the manufacturer recommends high-level disinfection for an item even though it enters a sterile
space and would require sterilization by Spaulding’s criteria, sterilization must be chosen.
MANUFACTURER’S RECOMMENDATIONS
The manufacturer’s information for all medical equipment/devices and decontamination equipment must be
received and maintained in a format that allows for easy access by staff carrying out the reprocessing
activities.“* The manufacturer must supply the following:

information about the design of the equipment/device

written and/or electronic manuals/directions for use”

device-specific recommendations for disassembly, cleaning and reprocessing of equipment/device,

including evidence that the device has been validated for disinfection/sterilization using the recommended

process/processes”

recommended detergents, enzymatic cleaners, disinfectants/sterilants and lubricants for use with the

equipment/device

recommended equipment/device exposure time to chemical agents

education for staff on use, cleaning and the correct reprocessing of the equipment/device

limitations related to number of times the equipment/device may be reprocessed without degradation” “

recommendations for auditing the recommended process.
A valid medical device license issued by the Therapeutic Products Directorate of Health Canada
[http://www.mdall.ca/] or provided by the manufacturer must be available for all medical equipment/devices”® that
are class Il and higher. Failure to comply with licensing could result in litigation under the Medical Devices
Regulations section of the Food and Drugs Act.””
Once the decision to use the equipment/device is made, the following questions must then be addressed:

Who is accountable to verify that the required protocols are written and in place, staff are adequately

trained and certified, and that routine audits will occur to verify that the process is safe?

Who will reprocess the equipment/device?

Where will the reprocessing be done?

= What process will be used for reprocessing?
= Are personnel certified to carry out this procedure (this includes training in the procedure, auditing the
process, regular re-education and re-certification)?
= How often will audits be performed?
= If there are limits to the number of times the equipment/device may be reprocessed, how is this tracked
and by whom?
LOANED, SHARED AND LEASED MEDICAL EQUIPMENT/DEVICES
A facility shall not use any medical equipment/device that does not arrive in sufficient time to allow the
receiving facility to follow its procedures for inventory, inspection and reprocessing.
Health care facilities shall develop and maintain policies and procedures that apply to the sending, transporting,
receiving, handling and processing of loaned, shared and leased medical equipment/devices,’® including
endoscopes. The following should be included in the policy:
= inaddition to the requirements in Section 2.A., equipment/devices loaned to a health care facility must be
disassembled, cleaned and reprocessed by the receiving facility prior to use in the receiving facility
= ideally, the equipment/device should be received by the facility’s Medical Device Reprocessing Centre
(MDRC) at least 24 hours before use; loaned medical equipment/devices must include written instructions
for reprocessing and staff must have received training in reprocessing the equipment/device
= ahealth care facility that uses loaned, shared and/or leased medical equipment/devices shall have a policy
to cover emergencies related to the equipment/devices
= loaned equipment/devices must be tracked and logged; there must be a tracking mechanism and log book
which includes:
= arecord of the identification number of the equipment/device
= the owner of the equipment/device must have a system to track the equipment/device; this
information should be given to the user for their records
= there must be a record of the client/patient/resident involved with the equipment/device, so
that the client/patient/resident may be identified if the equipment/device is recalled
m= there must be documentation about the reason for using loaned equipment and awareness of
the possible consequences
= borrowed equipment/devices must be cleaned and reprocessed before being returned to the owner
= organizations that transport loaned, shared and leased medical equipment/devices shall have written
procedures for the safe handling and transportation of medical equipment/devices, including provision for
maintenance of cleanliness, sterility, separation of clean and dirty items, and safety of those doing the
transport:
= soiled equipment/devices must be transported in compliance with federal and provincial
regulations regarding the transport of dangerous goods:
> Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act,"® S.C., 1992, c.34. Available at:
http://laws.justice.gc.ca/PDF/Statute/T/T-19.01.pdf
> Dangerous Goods Transportation Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. D.1. Available at: htip://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws statutes 90d01 e.htm
= clean equipment/devices must be transported in a manner that does not compromise the
integrity of the clean item.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 15

the use of loaned equipment/devices for neurosurgical procedures is strongly discouraged (see Section
2.A., ‘Purchasing and Assessing Medical Equipment/Devices and/or Products for Disinfection or
Sterilization Processes’).
CREUTZFELDT-JAKOB DISEASE (CJD)
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is caused by infection with a prion, which is a fragment of protein that is
resistant to most of the usual methods of reprocessing and decontamination. Specific recommendations have
been made by Health Canada/PHAC for the cleaning and decontamination of instruments and surfaces that have
been exposed to tissues considered infective for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).’* 7° These instruments should
not be pooled with other instruments.
Health Canada/PHAC defines a high risk patient as a patient diagnosed with CJD or a patient with an unusual,
progressive neurological disease consistent with CJD (e.g., dementia with myoclonus and ataxia, etc.). High risk
tissue includes brain, spinal cord, dura mater, pituitary and eye (including optic nerve and retina).’* 7" For variant
CJD, there are other tissues that are also infective (e.g., gastrointestinal, lymphatic).”*
Because of the risks associated with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), surgical instruments that are used on high
risk neurological and eye tissue from clients/patients/residents at high risk for CJD must be quarantined after
use and, if diagnosis is confirmed, be disposed of by incineration (preferable) or, alternatively, be subjected to
rigorous decontamination processes as detailed in the Health Canada/Public Health Agency of Canada infection
control guideline, Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in Canada’’; available at: www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/ccdr-
rmtc/02vol28/28s5/index.html.
Recommendations

1. Medical equipment/devices that cannot be cleaned and reprocessed according to the recommended
standards shall not be purchased or should be designated single-use. [CSA Z314.0]

2. When purchasing reprocessing equipment or chemical products for reprocessing, consideration shall
be given to Occupational Health requirements, client/patient/resident safety and environmental
safety issues. [CSA Z314.0]

3. All medical equipment/devices intended for use on a client/patient/resident that are being considered
for purchase or will be obtained in any other way (e.g., loaned equipment/devices, trial or research
equipment/devices, physician/practitioner-owned) shall meet established quality reprocessing
parameters. Such equipment should not be purchased or used until this process is established. [CSA
2314.0, CSA 2314.22]

4. Manufacturers’ information for all medical equipment/devices shall be received and maintained in a
format that allows for easy access by staff carrying out the reprocessing activities. [CSA Z314.0]

5. Newly purchased, non-sterile critical and semicritical medical equipment/devices must first be
inspected and reprocessed according to their intended use. [A1]

6. The organization shall develop and maintain policies and procedures that apply to the sending,
transporting, receiving, handling and processing of loaned, shared and leased medical
equipment/devices, including endoscopes. [CSA Z314.0, CSA-Z314.22]

7. Because of the risks associated with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), surgical instruments that are
used on high risk neurological and eye tissue from clients/patients/residents at high risk for CJD must
be quarantined after use and, if diagnosis is confirmed, be disposed of by incineration (preferably) or,
alternatively, be subjected to rigorous decontamination processes as detailed in the Health

Canada/Public Health Agency of Canada infection control guideline, “Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
in Canada”. [All]
B. Environmental Requirements for Reprocessing Areas
PHYSICAL SPACE
There must be a centralized area (MDRC) for reprocessing medical equipment/devices. In smaller settings, such
as clinics or offices in the community, this refers to any segregated area where reprocessing of
equipment/devices takes place, away from clients/patients/residents and clean areas.
Reprocessing performed outside the medical device reprocessing centre must be kept to a minimum and
must be approved by the reprocessing committee or those accountable for safe reprocessing practices and
must conform to the requirements for reprocessing space.
The environment where cleaning/decontamination is performed must” ” ™*:
= have adequate space for the cleaning process and storage of necessary equipment and supplies
= be distinctly separate from areas where clean/disinfected/sterile equipment/devices are handled or stored
= have easy access to hand hygiene facilities
= have surfaces that can be easily cleaned and disinfected
= have slip-proof flooring that can withstand wet mopping and hospital-grade cleaning and disinfecting products
= have environmental controls in accordance with requirements for reprocessing areas (e.g., temperature,
ventilation, humidity)
= have restricted access from other areas in the setting and ensure one-way movement by staff.
Decontamination work areas shall be physically separated from clean and other work areas by walls or partitions
to control traffic flow and to contain contaminants generated during the stages of cleaning. Walls or partitions
should be cleaned regularly and be constructed of materials that can withstand cleaning and disinfection.“
Decontamination sinks™:
= shall be designed and arranged to facilitate soaking, washing and rinsing of equipment/devices with
minimal movement or delay between steps
= should be adjacent to waterproof counter tops and a backsplash
= shall not have an overflow
= should be at a height that allows workers to use them without bending or straining
= should be large enough to accommodate trays or baskets of instruments
= should be deep enough to allow complete immersion of larger devices and instruments so that aerosols
are not generated during cleaning
= should be equipped with water ports for the flushing of instruments with lumens, if appropriate.
Hand hygiene facilities should be readily accessible and located in all personnel support areas and at all
entrances to, and exits from, the decontamination area. Hand hygiene facilities should include:
= hand washing sinks with hands-free controls, soap dispensers and paper towels; and/or
= alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR).
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 17

> Refer to Appendix C, ‘Recommendations for Physical Space for Reprocessing’, for details regarding
reprocessing area space requirements.
AIR QUALITY
The Regulation respecting Control of Exposure to Biological and Chemical Agents (O. Reg. 833/90) made under
the Occupational Health and Safety Act provides occupational exposure limits such as ceiling exposure value
(CEV) for chemical agents (e.g., glutaraldehyde). A CEV is the maximum airborne concentration of a chemical
agent to which a worker is exposed at any time. If control measures are not available during reprocessing
involving a chemical agent, air sampling may be required to ensure that the regulated limit has not been
exceeded for the chemical being used.
The health care setting must have air changes, temperature and humidity appropriate to the process/product
being used (refer to manufacturer’s recommendations for products and CSA Standards). In health care settings
where there are dedicated central reprocessing areas, negative pressure airflow must be maintained in soiled
areas and positive pressure airflow must be maintained in clean areas and be monitored.”
> Refer to Appendix C, ‘Recommendations for Physical Space for Reprocessing’, for specific information
regarding reprocessing area ventilation, temperature and humidity requirements.
WATER QUALITY
The health care setting should be aware of the quality of its water supply and develop policies to address known
problems. There should be written reprocessing contingency plans in place that address loss of potable water,
boil water advisories and other situations where the water supply becomes compromised.
> Refer to Appendix C, ‘Recommendations for Physical Space for Reprocessing’, for information regarding
reprocessing area water quality requirements
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANING IN STERILE PROCESSING DEPARTMENTS
The housekeeping department should consult with the management of the sterile processing department and
infection prevention and control to establish policies and procedures for environmental cleaning practices and
cleaning frequency. As a minimum”™:
The facility shall have written environmental cleaning procedures with clearly defined responsibilities for
all areas in the facility where decontamination is performed.
All work areas, stands, tables, countertops, sinks and equipment surfaces shall be cleaned and disinfected
at least daily.
Floors shall be cleaned at least daily.
If a spill occurs, the affected area shall be cleaned immediately.
Sinks shall be cleaned each shift at a minimum and more frequently as necessary.
Sinks used for cleaning endoscopes and respiratory equipment shall be cleaned between each use.
The sequence of cleaning shall be from clean areas to soiled areas, from high areas to low areas (i.e., top of
walls to floor) and from least contaminated to most contaminated.
Environmental cleaning staff shall not move back and forth between clean and soiled areas.
Environmental cleaning equipment used in the decontamination area shall not be used in any other area.
> Refer to PIDAC’s Best Practices for Environmental Cleaning for Prevention and Control of Infections in All
Health Care Settings for guidance regarding cleaning in reprocessing areas, available at:
http:/Awww.oahpp.ca/resources/documents/pidac/Environmental%20Cleaning%20BP ENGLISH FINAL 2012-07-
15.pdf.

Recommendations

8. There should be a centralized area for reprocessing medical equipment/devices. [BIII]

9. The decontamination work area must be physically separated from clean areas by walls or partitions.
[All]

10. Reprocessing performed outside the centralized area should be kept to a minimum, must be approved
by the reprocessing committee or those accountable for safe reprocessing practices and shall conform
to the requirements for reprocessing space. [CSA Z314.0]

11. Wherever chemical disinfection/sterilization is performed, air quality shall be monitored when using
products that produce toxic vapours and mists. [CSA Z314.0, CSA Z314.23]

12. There shall be a regular schedule for environmental cleaning in the Sterile Processing Department that
includes written procedures and clearly defined responsibilities.[CSA 2314.0]

C. Policies and Procedures
Policies and procedures must be established to ensure that the disinfection processes follow the principles of
infection prevention as set out by the Public Health Agency of Canada/Health Canada,”* the CSA standards” **
and these PIDAC best practices. Completed policies and procedures should be reviewed by an individual with
infection prevention and control expertise’ (e.g., facility’s infection prevention and control professionals, public
health staff with certification in infection prevention and control, Regional Infection Control Network). Review of
reprocessing policies and procedures must take place at least annually.
When formulating written policies and procedures, the following steps in reprocessing must be included” ™:
environmental conditions and infrastructure
provision for annual review of policies and procedures with updating as required
responsibilities of management and staff
qualifications, education and training for staff involved in reprocessing
ongoing audits of competency and procedures (who, when, how)
infection prevention and control activities
worker health and safety activities
preventive maintenance requirements with documentation of actions
documentation and maintenance of records for each component of the cleaning, disinfection and/or
sterilization process that are based on the manufacturer’s recommendations and established guidelines for
the intended use of the product, including but not limited to:
= collection at point-of-use, containment and transport
m= disassembly (if required)
= inspection
= cleaning
= disinfection/sterilization (including establishment of the level of reprocessing required for items,
based on the risk class and manufacturer’s instructions)
= rinsing (following disinfection)
= drying/aeration
= reassembly and functional testing
= clean/dry storage
= clean transportation
management and reporting to administration or appropriate regulatory body of incidents where
client/patient/resident safety may have been compromised

requirements for internal or external subcontractors, if applicable
written procedures for the recall and reprocessing of improperly reprocessed medical equipment/devices’:
= quarantine of non-implantable items in processed loads pending results of biological indicator
(Bl) testing (if load quarantine is not possible, evaluation of a Class 5 or 6 chemical indicator (Cl)
and specific cycle physical parameters may be used to justify the release of loads)
= quarantine of each load containing implantable devices pending results of BI testing
= contingency plans in the event of reprocessing failures
= a protocol that prevents the release of loads containing implantable devices pending results of
BI testing.
> See Section 2.0., ‘Continued Monitoring and System Failures’, for more information about the recall
procedure.
Recommendations
13. The health care setting shall, as a minimum, have policies and procedures for all aspects of
reprocessing that are based on current recognized standards/recommendations and that are
reviewed at least annually. [CSA 2314.8]
14, All policies and procedures for reprocessing medical equipment/devices shall be reviewed by an
individual with infection prevention and control expertise. [CSA Z314.8]
15. A procedure shall be established for the recall of improperly reprocessed medical equipment/devices.
[CSA Z314.0]
Dz. Education and Training
The manager and all supervisors involved in reprocessing must, as a minimum, have completed a recognized
qualification/certification course in reprocessing practices.” A plan must be in place for each person involved in
reprocessing to obtain this qualification.
> Refer to Appendix H, ‘Resources for Education and Training’, for a list of education and training
resources and sites.
It is strongly recommended that re-certification be obtained at least every five years.
Supervisory staff must be competent through education, training and experience in the reprocessing of reusable
medical equipment/devices.” “ It is the supervisor’s responsibility to ensure that:
Any individual involved in the cleaning, disinfection and/or sterilization of medical equipment/devices is
properly trained and their practice audited on a regular basis to verify that standards are met.
Training includes information on cleaning, disinfection and sterilization, occupational health and safety
issues, and infection prevention and control.
Orientation and continuing education is provided and documented for all personnel involved in
reprocessing of medical equipment/devices.
Feedback is provided to reprocessing staff in a timely manner.

All staff involved in reprocessing of medical equipment/devices must be supervised and shall be qualified
through education in a formally recognized course for sterilization technology, training and experience in the
functions they perform.” “ The policies of the health care setting shall specify the requirements for, and
frequency of, education and training as well as competency assessment for all personnel involved in the
reprocessing of medical equipment/devices and will ensure that:
All staff who are primarily involved in reprocessing obtain and maintain certification.
Any individual involved in any aspect of reprocessing obtains education, orientation and training specific to
the medical equipment/device to be reprocessed (e.g., dental hygienists, radiation technologists, nurses in
long- term care, nurses in physician offices).
There is a process in place to ensure continued competency, including continuing education provided at
regular intervals and periodic competency assessment."
All orientation, training and continuing education is documented.“
> Refer to the CSA’s Z314.8-08 Decontamination of Reusable Medical Devices“ for details regarding
specific requirements of training, orientation and continuing education programs for reprocessing staff.
Recommendations
16. The policies of the health care setting shall specify the requirements for, and frequency of, education
and training as well as competency assessment for all personnel involved in the reprocessing of
medical equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.0]
17. All aspects of reprocessing shall be supervised and shall be performed by knowledgeable, trained
personnel. [CSA 2314.0]
18. Managers, supervisors and staff involved in reprocessing shall have completed a recognized
qualification/certification course in reprocessing practices. [CSA 2314.0]
E. Occupational Health and Safety for Reprocessing
Occupational Health and Safety for the health care setting must review all protocols for reprocessing medical
equipment/devices to verify that staff safety measures are followed and are in compliance with the
Occupational Health and Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1 and associated Regulations including the Health Care and
Residential Facilities - O. Reg. 67/93 Amended to O. Reg. 495/09.” This review will verify that:
Sharps are handled appropriately.” ”
Local exhaust ventilation systems adequately protect staff from toxic vapours.’” 7°
Chemicals are labelled, stored and handled appropriately, and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) are
readily available as required by the Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS), R.R.O.
1990, Reg. 860 Amended to O. Reg. 36/93."
An eyewash fountain is installed to prevent a potential hazard to the eye due to contact with a biological or
chemical agent.”°
Personal protective equipment such as elbow length impervious gloves (insulated if using a steam
autoclave) for unloading the autoclave is present and comply with regulatory requirements.
> Information on WHMIS is available from the Health Canada website at: htto://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-
semt/occup-travail/whmis-simdut/index_e.html].

ROUTINE PRACTICES
Routine Practices® ”” must be part of all staff education and training to prevent exposure to body substances.
Procedures must be in place for immediate response to staff exposure to blood and body fluids or injury from
sharp objects.” All staff working in reprocessing must be immune to Hepatitis B or receive Hepatitis B
immunization.” ?> 8
All reusable medical equipment/devices must be reprocessed using procedures that are effective against all human
pathogens, including bloodborne pathogens. Special procedures, including labelling, for specific microorganisms
(e.g., MRSA, VRE) are not required. The exception is equipment/devices potentially exposed to CJD.
“All activities included in the reprocessing of medical equipment/devices are based on the consistent
application of Routine Practices and Hand Hygiene.”
Public Health Agency of Canada
Routine practices in reprocessing areas include:
Eating/drinking, storage of food, smoking, application of cosmetics or lip balm and handling contact lenses
in the reprocessing area is not permitted.” “
There is no storage of personal effects, including food and drink, in the reprocessing area.’
Hand hygiene facilities are located at all entrances to, and exits from, reprocessing areas and faucets
should be supplied with foot-, wrist- or knee-operated handles or electronic sensors.” “
Hand hygiene training for staff involved in reprocessing is provided and includes” ” ™*:
m= Hands are cleaned before beginning work, before breaks and upon completion of work; after
removing gloves; and whenever hands are contaminated with body substances.
= If there is visible soil on the hands, hand hygiene is performed with soap and water. If there is no
visible soil on the hands, staff may use either soap and water or an alcohol-based hand rub (ABHR).
m= Hand and arm jewellery or nail enhancements are not worn.
= Skin care is promoted.
There is provision for, and wearing of, appropriate PPE for all reprocessing activities.
> More information on Routine Practices may be found in PIDAC’s Routine Practices and Additional
Precautions for All Health Care Settings,° available at: htip://www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-knowledge/best-
practice-manuals/routine-practices-and-additional-precautions.html.
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT (PPE)
Staff involved in reprocessing must be trained in the correct use, wearing, limitations and indications for
PPE’ 6,14,
PPE worn for cleaning and handling contaminated equipment/devices includes gloves appropriate to the
task, face protection (i.e., full face shield OR fluid-impervious face mask and protective eyewear)’ and
impermeable gown or waterproof apron; refer to PIDAC’s Routine Practices and Additional Precautions for
All Health Care Settings,° Appendix M, for guidance in choosing task-specific PPE.
When choosing gloves, the following points need to be considered:
= Gloves must be long enough to cover wrists and forearms.

= Gloves must be of sufficient weight to be highly tear-resistant.
= Gloves must allow adequate dexterity of the fingers.
= Disposable gloves are recommended. If reusable gloves are required, they must be
decontaminated daily, inspected for tears and holes and be dedicated to a specific individual.
PPE is removed on completion of the task for which it was indicated and before leaving the reprocessing area.’
Staff must be trained in management of a blood or body fluid spill.” **
Where there is the risk of exposure to biological and/or chemical agents, eye wash stations must be
provided and staff must be trained in their use.
> More information on PPE may be found in PIDAC’s Routine Practices and Additional Precautions for All
Health Care Settings,° available at: http://www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-knowledge/best-practice-
manuals/routine-practices-and-additional-precautions.html.
SAFE HANDLING OF SHARPS
Procedures shall be in place to prevent injuries from sharp objects. When working with sharps, staff in the
decontamination area shall”:
place disposable sharp objects in puncture-resistant containers
take care when handling glass and other fragile objects
discard chipped or broken glass devices or arrange to have them repaired
not recap used needles or other sharps unless using a recapping device
not manually bend or break needles.
WORK RESTRICTIONS
Reprocessing staff are subject to some work restrictions’:
Staff who have respiratory problems (e.g., asthma) should be assessed by Occupational Health and Safety
staff prior to working with chemical disinfectants or cleaning agents.
Staff who have exudative lesions or weeping dermatitis shall refrain from handling client/patient/resident
care equipment until the condition is resolved.
Recommendations
19. Occupational Health and Safety for the health care setting shall review all protocols for reprocessing
medical equipment/devices to verify that worker safety measures and procedures to eliminate or
minimize the risk of exposure are followed and are in compliance with the Occupational Health and
Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1 and its Regulation including the Health Care and Residential Facilities -
O. Reg. 67/93 amended to O. Reg. 631/05. [CSA Z314.8, O. Reg. 67/93]
20. There shall be a policy that prohibits eating/drinking, storage of food, smoking, application of
cosmetics or lip balm and handling contact lenses in the reprocessing area. [CSA 2314.0]
21. Appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) shall be worn for all reprocessing activities. [CSA
2314.0]
22. All staff working in reprocessing shall be offered Hepatitis B immunization unless they have
documented immunity to Hepatitis B. [CSA 2314.0]

23. There shall be written measures and procedures to prevent and manage injuries from sharp objects.
[CSA Z314.0, O. Reg. 67/93]

24, Measures and procedures shall be in place for immediate response to worker exposure to bloodborne
pathogens. [CSA Z314.0]

F. Transportation and Handling of Contaminated Medical Equipment/Devices

Soiled medical equipment/devices must be handled in a manner that reduces the risk of exposure and/or injury

to personnel and clients/patients/residents, or contamination of environmental surfaces”™:
Closed carts or covered containers designed to prevent the spill of liquids, with easily cleanable surfaces,
shall be used for handling and transporting soiled medical equipment/devices.
Soiled equipment/devices shall be transported by direct routes, that avoid high-traffic, clean/sterile
storage and client/patient/resident care areas, to areas where cleaning will be done.
Containers or carts used to transport soiled medical equipment/devices shall be cleaned after each use.
Disposable sharps shall be disposed of in an appropriate puncture-resistant sharps container at point-of-
use, prior to transportation.

Recommendations

25. Disposable sharps shall be disposed of in an appropriate puncture-resistant sharps container at point-
of-use, prior to transportation. [O. Reg. 67/93]

26. Soiled medical equipment/devices shall be handled in a manner that reduces the risk of exposure
and/or injury to personnel and clients/patients/residents, or contamination of environmental
surfaces, according to routine infection prevention and control practices. [CSA 2314.8]

27. A process shall be in place that will ensure that medical equipment/devices which have been
reprocessed can be differentiated from equipment/devices which have not been reprocessed (e.g.,
colour coding). [CSA 2314.8]

28. Contaminated equipment/devices shall not be transported through areas designated for storage of
clean or sterile supplies, client/patient/resident care areas or high-traffic areas. [CSA Z314.8]

29. Sterile and soiled equipment/devices shall not be transported together. [CSA Z314.8]

G. Selection of Product and Level for Reprocessing

The reprocessing level and products required for medical equipment/devices will depend on the intended use of
the equipment/device and the potential risk of infection involved in the use of the equipment/device.
REPROCESSING LEVEL

The classification system developed by Spaulding’? (Table 1) divides medical equipment/devices into three
categories, based on the potential risk of infection involved in their use.

Table 1: Spaulding's Classification of Medical Equipment/Devices and Required Level of
Processing/Reprocessing
Classification | Definition Level of Examples
Processing/Reprocessing
Critical Equipment/device that enters Cleaning followed by e = Surgical instruments
Equipment/ sterile tissues, including the Sterilization ¢ Implants
Device vascular system © Biopsy instruments
e Foot care equipment
e Eye and dental equipment
Semicritical Equipment/device that comes in Cleaning followed by High- e Respiratory therapy
Equipment/ contact with non-intact skin or Level Disinfection (as a equipment
Device mucous membranes but does not = minimum) e Anaesthesia equipment
penetrate them Sterilization is preferred © Tonometer
Noncritical Equipment/device that touches Cleaning followed by Low- Level ¢@ ECG machines
Equipment/ only intact skin and not mucous Disinfection (in some cases, e  Oximeters
Device membranes, or does not directly — cleaning alone is acceptable) © Bedpans, urinals
touch the client/patient/resident commodes
REPROCESSING PRODUCTS
Products used for any/all stages in reprocessing (i.e., cleaning, disinfection, sterilization) must be:
= appropriate to the level of reprocessing that is required for the use of the medical equipment/device
= approved by the committee responsible for product selection, by an individual with reprocessing expertise
and by an individual with infection prevention and control expertise.
The process and products used for cleaning, disinfection and/or sterilization of medical equipment/devices must
be compatible with the equipment/devices:
= The compatibility of the equipment/device to be reprocessed with detergents, cleaning agents and
disinfection/sterilization processes is determined by the manufacturer of the equipment/device.
= The manufacturer must provide written information regarding the safe and appropriate reprocessing of
the medical equipment/device.
> Refer to Appendix B, ‘Reprocessing Decision Chart’, for guidance in choosing reprocessing products and
processes.
Recommendations
30. Products used for any/all stages in reprocessing (i.e., cleaning, disinfection, sterilization) shall be
approved by the committee responsible for product selection, by an individual with reprocessing
expertise and by an individual with infection prevention and control expertise. [CSA 2314.0]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 25

31. The reprocessing method, level and products required for medical equipment/devices shall reflect the
intended use of the equipment/device and the potential risk of infection involved in the use of the
equipment/device. [CSA Z314.8]

32. Products used for decontamination shall be appropriate to the level of reprocessing that is required
for the use of the medical equipment/device. [CSA Z314.8]

33. The process and products used for cleaning, disinfection and/or sterilization of medical
equipment/devices shall be compatible with the equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.8]

34, All medical equipment/devices that will be purchased and will be reprocessed shall have written
device-specific manufacturer’s cleaning, decontamination, disinfection, wrapping and sterilization
instruction. If disassembly or reassembly is required, detailed instructions with pictures shall be
included. Staff training must be provided on these processes before the medical equipment/device is
placed into circulation. [CSA Z314.8]

H. Factors Affecting the Efficacy of the Reprocessing Procedure
Policies and procedures for disinfection and sterilization must include statements to address factors that might affect
the effectiveness of reprocessing. These procedures must be readily accessible to staff doing the reprocessing.
Many factors” ***? affect the efficacy of reprocessing, particularly when chemical reprocessing is used. These
factors include:
Cleanliness of the surface of the equipment/device:
= Many chemical disinfectants/sterilants are inactivated by organic material; cleaning must always
precede decontamination.
m= The greater the bioburden, the more difficult it is to disinfect or sterilize the equipment/device.
Characteristics of equipment/device” **:
m= Long, narrow lumens and channels (e.g., irrigation channels) are difficult to clean.
m= Materials such as rubber and plastic may require special treatment.
= Devices that cannot be readily dismantled (e.g., arthroscopy forceps) may be difficult to clean.
= Rough or porous surfaces may trap microorganisms (e.g., ridges, ribbing, grooves, articulations).
= Hinges, cracks, coils, valves, joints, clamps, luer locks, surface pores, crevices on the
equipment/device may impede successful disinfection/sterilization.
Type and concentration of the product:
= Mix products used for disinfection and/or sterilization according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations in order to achieve the correct dilution; if the concentration of the
disinfectant is too low, the efficacy will be decreased; if the concentration is too high, the risk of
damage to the instrument or toxic effects on the user increases.
= Dry equipment/devices after cleaning, before immersing in disinfectant, to prevent dilution of
the disinfectant.”
= Discard solutions on or before expiry date; diluted products are inherently unstable once mixed
and the manufacturer’s directions as to duration of use must be followed.
m= Use chemical test strips for all high-level liquid disinfectants to assess their efficacy as directed
by the manufacturer; during reuse, the concentration of active ingredients may decrease as
dilution of the product occurs and organic impurities accumulate.”

= Use the appropriate disinfectant/sporicide for the task; infection prevention and control must
approve disinfectants and their application.
= When choosing the product/process, consider that some microorganisms are more resistant to
disinfectants/sporicides.
Duration and temperature of exposure to the product:
= Use Spaulding’s criteria (Table 1) for the level of disinfection/sterilization required for the
intended use of the equipment/device. Refer to Appendix G, ‘Advantages and Disadvantages of
Currently Available Reprocessing Options’ for minimum exposure time to disinfectants/sterilants
to achieve this level.
m Use manufacturer's recommendations for temperature and for exposure time required to
achieve the desired level of disinfection/sterilization.
= Do not exceed the manufacturer's maximum exposure time, as some chemicals may cause
damage to the medical equipment/device if used for extended periods of time.
= Consult with an infection prevention and control professional where the manufacturer’s
recommendations for minimum exposure time conflict with those of Spaulding’s criteria for the
intended use.
= Ensure that all surfaces of the article are in direct contact with the disinfectant/sterilant.
= Contact time may be compromised by the complexity of the article and the ability of the
disinfectant to penetrate lumens and other areas that are difficult to reach.
Physical and chemical properties of the reprocessing environment:
= Water hardness can affect some disinfectants (refer to Appendix C, ‘Recommendations for
Physical Space for Reprocessing’).
m= Excessive humidity may compromise sterile wrappings (refer to Appendix C, ‘Recommendations
for Physical Space for Reprocessing’).
= The pH of the solution may be an important consideration, as extremes of acidity or alkalinity
can limit growth of microorganisms or alter the activity of disinfectants and sterilants.
All medical equipment/devices that will be purchased and will be reprocessed must have written device-specific
manufacturer’s cleaning, decontamination, disinfection, wrapping and sterilization instruction. If disassembly or
reassembly is required, detailed instructions with pictures must be included. Staff training must be provided on
these processes before the medical equipment/device is placed into circulation.
Recommendation
35. Factors that affect the ability to effectively clean medical equipment/devices shall be considered prior
to cleaning. [CSA Z314.8]

I. Disassembly, Inspection and Cleaning of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices
“Cleaning is always essential prior to disinfection or sterilization. An item that has not been cleaned cannot
be assuredly disinfected or sterilized.”
Public Health Agency of Canada/Health Canada
Reusable medical equipment/devices must be thoroughly cleaned before disinfection or sterilization.”* The
process of cleaning physically removes contaminants from the equipment/device, rather than killing
microorganisms. If an item is not cleaned, soil (e.g., blood, body fluids, dirt) can protect the microorganisms
from the action of the disinfection or sterilization process making it ineffective, as well as inactivate the
disinfectant or sterilant so that it does not work. Disinfectants that become overloaded with soil can become
contaminated and may become a source for transmission of microorganisms.
PRE-CLEANING
Gross soil (e.g., faeces, sputum, blood) shall be removed immediately at point-of-use.”* If cleaning cannot be
done immediately, the medical equipment/device must be submerged in tepid water and detergent or
enzymatic cleaner to prevent organic matter from drying on it.” 7?
Factors that affect the ability to effectively clean medical equipment/devices must be considered prior to
cleaning. See Section 2.H., ‘Factors Affecting the Efficacy of the Reprocessing Procedure’, for a list of factors that
must be considered prior to cleaning medical equipment/devices.
Policies and procedures for cleaning medical equipment/devices shall be based on the manufacturer’s
instructions and must be developed in consultation with Infection Prevention and Control, Occupational Health
and Safety, Biomedical Engineering and Environmental Services.” ™ Full PPE shall be worn for handling and
cleaning contaminated equipment/devices (see Section 2.E., ‘Occupational Health and Safety for Reprocessing’).
Once medical equipment/devices have been received in the reprocessing area/department, they must be
disassembled, sorted and soaked:
Disassembly — facilitates access of the cleaning agent, disinfectant and/or sterilant to device surfaces:
= Equipment/devices shall be disassembled™ prior to cleaning if there is one or more removable
part,”? unless otherwise recommended by the manufacturer.
m= The manufacturer’s recommendations shall be followed when disassembling medical
equipment/devices prior to washing.
Sorting — keeps medical equipment/devices that belong to a set together and streamlines the cleaning
process:
= Sort equipment/devices into groups of like products requiring the same processes.
= Segregate sharps and/or delicate equipment/devices to prevent injury to personnel and damage
to the equipment/device.
Soaking — prevents soil from drying on equipment/devices and makes them easier to clean:
= Soak equipment/device in a hospital approved instrument soaking solution.
= Do not use saline as a soaking solution as it damages some medical equipment/devices.

m Use detergent-based products, including those containing enzymes, as part of the soaking
process.
= Ensure that detergents (including enzymatic cleaners) are appropriate to the equipment/device
being cleaned (products used must be approved by the equipment/device manufacturer).’*
= Avoid prolonged soaking (e.g., overnight) of equipment/devices.
CLEANING
Cleaning may be done manually or using mechanical cleaning machines (e.g., washer-disinfector, ultrasonic
washer, washer-sterilizer) after gross soil has been removed. Automated machines may increase productivity,
improve cleaning effectiveness and decrease staff exposure to blood and body fluids.”? Manual cleaning may be
required for delicate or intricate items.
The equipment/device manufacturer’s cleaning instructions shall be followed, including specifications for
detergent type, water temperature and cleaning methods. The following procedures are included in the cleaning
process:
Physical Removal of Residual Organic Materials
= Completely submerge immersible items during the cleaning process to minimize aerosolization
of microorganisms and assist in cleaning.“
= Minimize the production of aerosols when cleaning non-immersible equipment/devices.
= Remove gross soil using tools such as brushes and cloths.
Manual Cleaning’
= Clean equipment/devices that have lumens with a brush, according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, then manually or mechanically flush with a detergent solution and rinse.
= Check equipment/devices with lumens for obstructions and leakage.
= Manually clean heavily soiled equipment/devices before mechanical cleaning.
Mechanical Cleaning™
Whenever possible, clean equipment/devices by mechanical means:
m= Use mechanical washers in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
= Ensure that the equipment/device to be cleaned is compatible with the mechanical cleaning
equipment and chemical solutions that are being used.
m Ultrasonic washers are strongly recommended for any semi-critical or critical medical
equipment/device that has joints, crevices, lumens or other areas that are difficult to clean:
= The manufacturer’s instructions must be followed for use and routine cleaning and
maintenance of the ultrasonic washer.
= Equipment/devices shall be completely immersed in the washing solution.
= After cleaning, equipment/devices shall be rinsed thoroughly prior to further reprocessing.
= The ultrasonic washing solution should be changed at least daily or more frequently if it
becomes visibly soiled or if the manufacturer’s instructions specify more frequent changes.
= Washer-disinfectors are strongly recommended for medical equipment/devices that can
withstand mechanical cleaning, to achieve the required exposure for cleaning and to reduce
potential risk to personnel:
= Washer-disinfectors must meet the requirements of the CSA.

= The manufacturer’s instructions must be followed for the use and routine maintenance,
cleaning and calibration of the washer-disinfector.
= Washer-disinfectors may be used for low-level disinfection.
= Washer-disinfectors are not to be used for high-level disinfection.
Care of Cleaning Tools
= Inspect brushes and other cleaning equipment for damage after each use, and discard if
necessary.”
= Clean, disinfect, dry and store tools used to assist in cleaning (e.g., brushes, cloths) after each
use, or else discard.“
Rinsing
Rinsing following cleaning is necessary, as residual detergent may neutralize the disinfectant:
= Rinse all equipment/devices thoroughly after cleaning with water to remove residues which
might react with the disinfectant/sterilant.
= Perform the final rinse for equipment/devices containing lumens with commercially prepared
sterile, pyrogen-free water (note: distilled water is not necessarily sterile or pyrogen-free).
Drying’
Drying is an important step that prevents dilution of chemical disinfectants which may render them
ineffective and prevents microbial growth:
= Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for drying of the equipment/device.
= Equipment/devices may be air-dried or dried by hand with a clean, lint-free towel.
= Dry lumens with compressed air that has been filtered and dried.
= Drystainless steel equipment/devices immediately after rinsing to prevent spotting.
POST-CLEANING
Once medical equipment/devices have been reprocessed, there must be a process to ensure that they can be
differentiated from equipment/devices which have not been reprocessed. Sterilized items may be identified
using external chemical indicators (Cls), such as autoclave tape, which changes colour during sterilization.
Equipment/devices which receive high-level disinfection should also be labelled, tagged or colour-coded to
indicate that they have been reprocessed.
The following procedures must be included following the cleaning process” ™:
Reassembly and Inspection
= Visually inspect all equipment/devices once the cleaning process has been completed and prior
to terminal disinfection/sterilization to ensure cleanliness and integrity of the equipment/device
(e.g., cracks, defects, adhesive failures).
= Repeat the cleaning on any item that is not clean.
= Donot reassemble equipment/device prior to disinfection/sterilization unless the
equipment/device manufacturer’s instructions specify reassembly at this stage in the
reprocessing, in which case it shall take place in a clean area and be performed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s instructions.
Lubrication
= Follow the manufacturer’s guidelines for lubrication.
= Equipment/devices requiring lubrication shall be lubricated prior to sterilization.

= Lubricants shall be compatible with the device and with the sterilization process.
= Discard lubricants on or before the expiry date or when visibly soiled or contaminated.
Wrapping

= Equipment/devices that are to be sterilized require wrapping prior to sterilization (except for
immediate use steam sterilization (‘flash sterilization’) - see Section 2.L., ‘Immediate Use Steam
Sterilization’).

= Materials used for wrapping shall be prepared in a manner that will allow adequate air removal,
steam penetration and evacuation to all surfaces.

> Refer to CSA Z314.3-09, Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process for
information on packaging materials, containers and methods.*

Practice audits
m= Cleaning processes must be audited on a regular basis.
= A quality improvement process must be in place to deal with any irregularities/concerns
resulting from the audit.
Recommendations

36. Reusable medical equipment/devices shall be thoroughly cleaned before disinfection or sterilization.
[CSA Z314.3, CSA Z314.8]

37. If cleaning cannot be done immediately, the medical equipment/device shall be kept moist ina
transport container by using a product specifically intended for this use and in accordance with
manufacturer’s instructions. [CSA Z314.8]

38. The process for cleaning shall include written protocols for disassembly, sorting, soaking, physical removal
of organic material, rinsing, drying, physical inspection, lubrication and wrapping. [CSA Z314.8]

39. Audits of the cleaning process shall be done on a regular basis. [CSA 2314.0]

J. Disinfection of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices
“Failure to use disinfection products or processes appropriately has repeatedly been associated with the
transmission of healthcare associated infections.”

Public Health Agency of Canada/Health Canada
Disinfection is the inactivation of disease-producing microorganisms. Disinfection does not destroy bacterial
spores or prions. Disinfection of medical equipment/devices falls into two major categories — low-level
disinfection and high-level disinfection.

Noncritical and semicritical medical equipment/devices that are owned by the client; re-used by that client
and used only by that client in their home; and not used for another purpose, do not require disinfection
between uses, provided that they are adequately cleaned and stored dry between uses.
> See Section 2.1., ‘Disassembly, Inspection and Cleaning of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices’, for
cleaning requirements prior to disinfection.

LOW-LEVEL DISINFECTION (LLD)
Low-level disinfection eliminates vegetative (‘live’) bacteria, some fungi and enveloped viruses. LLD is used for
noncritical medical equipment/devices and some environmental surfaces. Low-level disinfectants include 3%
hydrogen , 0.5% enhanced action formulation hydrogen peroxide, some quaternary ammonium compounds
(QUATS), phenolics and diluted sodium hypochlorite (e.g., bleach) solutions. LLD is performed after the
equipment/device is thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and excess rinse water is removed. The container used for
disinfection must be washed, rinsed and dried when the solution is changed. Refer to Appendix B, ‘Reprocessing
Decision Chart’, for chemical products that may be used to achieve low-level disinfection.
Noncritical medical equipment/devices require decontamination using a low-level disinfectant (Table 1).”* 7°
HIGH-LEVEL DISINFECTION (HLD)
High-level disinfection eliminates vegetative bacteria, enveloped viruses, fungi, mycobacteria (e.g., Tuberculosis)
and non-enveloped viruses. HLD is used for semicritical medical equipment/devices. High-level disinfectants
include 2% glutaraldehyde, 6% hydrogen peroxide, 0.2% peracetic acid, 2-7% enhanced action formulation
hydrogen peroxide and 0.55% ortho-phthalaldehyde (OPA). Pasteurization also achieves high-level disinfection.
HLD is performed after the equipment/device is thoroughly cleaned, rinsed and excess rinse water is removed.
Refer to Appendix B, ‘Reprocessing Decision Chart’, and Appendix G, ‘Advantages and Disadvantages of
Currently Available Reprocessing Options’ for chemical products that may be used to achieve high-level
disinfection.
Sterilization is the preferred method of decontamination for semicritical medical equipment/devices.
Semicritical medical equipment/devices require decontamination using, at a minimum, high-level disinfection
(Table 1).’* 7° Sterilization is the preferred method of decontamination for these devices.
METHODS OF DISINFECTION FOR SEMICRITICAL MEDICAL EQUIPMENT/DEVICES
There are two major methods of disinfection used in health care settings — liquid chemicals and pasteurization.
Liquid Chemical Disinfection
When selecting a disinfectant for reprocessing medical equipment/devices in the health care setting, consider™:

= the requirement for disinfectants to have a Drug Identification Number (DIN) from Health Canada”®

= efficacy for the intended use

= compatibility with the equipment/device and surfaces to be disinfected
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 32

compatibility with detergents, cleaning agents and disinfection and/or sterilization processes
the intended end use of the equipment/devices to be disinfected
the method for monitoring the product concentration
recommendations for rinsing (e.g., water quality, volume, time)
safety for use, with minimal toxic and irritating effects to/for staff?
environmental safety and biodegradability.”
The manufacturer’s recommendations for chemical disinfectants must be followed pertaining to:
usage - disinfectant manufacturers must supply recommended usage for the disinfectant to ensure that it
is compatible with the medical equipment/devices on which it will be used
contact time (NOTE: where the manufacturer recommends a shorter contact time with a particular product
than is required to achieve the desired level of disinfection/sterilization, an infection prevention and
control professional must be consulted for advice)
shelf life
storage
appropriate dilution
required PPE.
If a disinfectant manufacturer is unable to provide compatibility information specific to a piece of medical
equipment/device, information may be obtained from Health Canada’s drug information website, available at:
http:/Awww.hce-sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/prodpharma/databasdon/index-eng.php.
The process of high-level disinfection requires monitoring and auditing:
chemical test strips should be used to determine whether an effective concentration of active ingredients
is present, despite repeated use and dilution:
m the frequency of testing should be based on how frequently the solutions are used (i.e., test
daily if used daily); at a minimum, test according to manufacturer’s instruction
= chemical test strips must be checked each time a new package/bottle is opened to verify they
are accurate, using positive (e.g., full strength disinfectant solution) and negative (e.g., tap
water) controls; see manufacturer’s recommendations for appropriate controls
= test strips must not be considered a way of extending the use of a disinfectant solution beyond
the expiration date
a permanent record of processing shall be completed and retained according to the policy of the facility”;
this record shall include, but not be limited to:
= the identification of the equipment/device to be disinfected
m= date and time of the clinical procedure
= concentration and contact time of the disinfectant used in each process
= results of each inspection (and, for endoscopes, each leak test)
= result of each testing of the disinfectant
m= the name of the person completing the reprocessing.
disinfection practices shall be audited on a regular basis and a quality improvement process must be in
place to deal with any irregularities/concerns resulting from the audit
prepared solutions shall not be topped up with fresh solution”
if manual disinfection is performed, the container used for disinfection shall be kept covered during use™*
and washed, rinsed and dried when the solution is changed

each device shall be thoroughly rinsed following chemical HLD, according to the chemical manufacturer’s

instructions; the quality of the rinse water (i.e., sterile, filtered or tap water) will depend on the intended

use of the device™

unless a device will be used immediately, it shall be thoroughly dried**

drying of non-critical devices may be done by air-drying or other methods.“
Pasteurization (Thermal Disinfection)
Pasteurization, or thermal disinfection, is a process of hot water disinfection (minimum 71°C /160°F for at least
30 minutes”), which is accomplished through the use of automated pasteurizers or washer disinfectors.
Semicritical medical equipment/devices suitable for pasteurization include equipment for respiratory therapy
and anaesthesia. Equipment/devices require thorough cleaning and rinsing prior to pasteurization (see Section
2.1., ‘Disassembly, Inspection and Cleaning of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices’, for information about
cleaning prior to pasteurization).
Advantages of pasteurization include:

no toxicity

rapid disinfection cycle

moderate cost of machinery and upkeep.
Disadvantages of pasteurization include:

may cause splash burns

difficulty validating the effectiveness of the process

pasteurizers and related equipment can become contaminated without a good preventive maintenance

program and careful monitoring of processes.
The manufacturer’s instructions for installation, operation and ongoing maintenance of pasteurizing equipment
must be followed to ensure that the machine does not become contaminated:

the process must be monitored with mechanical temperature gauges and timing mechanisms for each

load, with a paper printout record; pasteurizing equipment must have, or be retrofitted for, mechanical

paper printout

water temperature within the pasteurizer should be verified weekly by manually measuring the cycle water

temperature

cycle time should be verified manually and recorded daily

calibration of pasteurization equipment will be performed according to the manufacturer’s

recommendations

daily cleaning of pasteurizing equipment is required following the manufacturer’s recommendations

following pasteurization, medical equipment/devices should be inspected for wear, cracks or soil:

= damaged equipment/devices shall be handled according to facility procedures
= soiled equipment/devices shall be reprocessed.

Following pasteurization, medical equipment/devices shall be handled in a manner that prevents contamination.
Equipment/devices shall be transported directly from the pasteurizer to a clean area for drying, assembly and
packaging. Medical equipment/devices shall be thoroughly dried in a drying cabinet that is equipped with a high
efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter and is used exclusively for the drying of pasteurized equipment/devices.”*
A preventive maintenance program for drying cabinets must be implemented and documented.
Printed records of each cycle (i.e., temperature, time) shall be retained in accordance with the health care
setting’s requirements.“

Recommendations

40. Noncritical medical equipment/devices shall be decontaminated using a low-level disinfectant. [CSA
2314.8]

41. A semicritical device shall be sterilized if it can be safely sterilized according to manufacturer's
instructions. If a semicritical device cannot be sterilized, then it shall, at a minimum, be high-level
disinfected, thermally disinfected or pasteurized between uses. [CSA 2314.8]

42. Noncritical and semicritical medical equipment/devices that are owned by the client; re-used by that
client and used only by that client in their home; and not used for another purpose, do not require
disinfection between uses, provided that they are adequately cleaned and stored dry between uses.
[BIII]

43. All disinfectants shall have a Drug Identification Number (DIN) from Health Canada. [CSA Z314.8]

44, The chemical disinfectant used for disinfecting medical equipment/devices must be compatible with
both the equipment/device manufacturer’s instructions for disinfection and the cleaning products
involved in the reprocessing of the equipment/device. [BIII]

45. Disinfectant manufacturers must supply recommendations for the use and safe handling of the
disinfectant. [BIII]

46. The process of high-level disinfection requires monitoring and auditing. If a chemical product is used,
the concentration of the active ingredient(s) shall be verified and a logbook of daily concentration test
results shall be maintained. [CSA 2314.8]

47. Manufacturer’s instructions for installation, operation and ongoing maintenance of pasteurizing
equipment shall be followed to ensure that the machine does not become contaminated. [CSA Z314.8]

48. A preventive maintenance program for pasteurizing equipment shall be implemented and
documented. [CSA 2314.0]

49. Following the pasteurizing cycle, medical equipment/devices shall be thoroughly dried in a drying
cabinet that is equipped with a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter and that is used exclusively
for the drying of pasteurized equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.8]

50. A log of contents, temperature and time shall be maintained for each pasteurizer cycle. [CSA 2314.8]

K. Sterilization of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices

Sterilization is the elimination of all disease-producing microorganisms, including spores (e.g. Clostridium and
Bacillus species) and prions. However, prions are not susceptible to routinely used sterilization processes.
Sterilization is used on critical medical equipment/devices and, whenever possible, semicritical medical
equipment/devices. The preferred method for decontamination of heat-resistant equipment/devices is
dynamic air removal steam sterilization (pre-vacuum sterilizers are preferred), rather than gravity
displacement.”

The preferred method for decontamination of heat-resistant medical equipment/devices is dynamic air
removal steam sterilization. For critical items that cannot withstand steam sterilization, chemical
sterilization shall be used.

For critical equipment/devices that cannot withstand heat sterilization, chemical sterilization is required. Some
examples of chemical sterilants include” ”*:

hydrogen peroxide gas plasma

vapourized hydrogen peroxide

ozone

hydrogen peroxide/ozone combinations

liquid peracetic acid

100% ethylene oxide

6% hydrogen peroxide

2% glutaraldehyde (> 10 hours)

2% enhanced action formulation hydrogen peroxide (6 hours)

7% enhanced action formulation hydrogen peroxide (20 minutes)

> Refer to Appendix B, ‘Reprocessing Decision Chart’, and Appendix G, ‘Advantages and Disadvantages of
Currently Available Reprocessing Options’ for chemical products that may be used to achieve sterilization.

STERILIZATION PROCESS
Medical equipment/devices that have contact with sterile body tissues or fluids are considered critical items.’°
All critical medical equipment/devices must be sterilized,” ** ** ** because microbial contamination could result
in disease transmission. Critical items include surgical instruments, implants, foot care equipment, endoscopes
that enter sterile cavities and spaces, colposcopy equipment, biopsy forceps and brushes, eye equipment and
dental equipment.
Semicritical medical equipment/devices have contact with nonintact skin or mucous membranes but do not
penetrate them.’ Whenever possible, semicritical medical equipment/devices should be sterilized. When
sterilization is not possible, semicritical equipment/devices shall be cleaned, followed by high-level
disinfection.”
Health care settings shall have written policies and procedures for sterilization of medical equipment/devices
processes that include:

sterilization processes that follow the principles of infection prevention and control as set out in Health

Canada guidelines,”* CSA standards” ** * and these PIDAC best practices

manufacturer’s instructions for installation, operation, cleaning and preventive maintenance of the

equipment

include clearly defined responsibilities” ”

clearly defined processes for cleaning, decontamination, drying, inspection, lubrication, disassembly,

wrapping, sealing and labelling” *” *7

a thorough evaluation of all sterilization processes before being put into service, and at regular intervals

thereafter.
NEW STERILIZERS
Input from a professional with infection prevention and control expertise must be obtained prior to the
purchase of a new sterilizer. There must be good communication between the health care setting and the
manufacturer of the sterilizer to ensure that” »:

manufacturers of sterilizers provide specific, written instructions on installation and use of their equipment

storage and transportation practices maintain sterility to the point of use

manufacturers of sterilizers are specific as to which medical equipment/devices can be sterilized in their

machines and the recommended sterilization methods.

Sterilizers must be subjected to rigorous testing and monitoring on installation and following disruptions to their
normal activity:
Autoclaves must be installed according to the manufacturer’s instructions.”
Tabletop steam sterilizers are recommended only for office settings.”
Following installation of a new sterilizer, the sterilizer must pass at least three consecutive cycles with the
appropriate challenges (i.e., biological, chemical) placed in an empty sterilizer, as well as at least one cycle
challenged with a full test load, before the sterilizer can be put into routine service.
For sterilizers of the dynamic air removal type (vacuum), three consecutive air removal tests shall be
conducted in an empty sterilizer with the air detection test pack (e.g., Bowie-Dick),”? as described in the
CSA’s ‘Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’ [CSA Z314.3-09 Clauses 12.4.3.2
to 12.4.3.4].
A sterilizer shall not be approved for use if the biological indicator (BI) yields a positive result on any of the
tests.’
Sterilizers must be monitored with a test load and be fully re-qualified in the following circumstances” *:
= after major repairs to an existing sterilizer
= when there has been construction, relocation or other environmental changes in the area
= after unexplained sterility failures
= after changes in steam and/or ethylene oxide supply or delivery
= after repairs or modification to the emission control system.
For more information regarding requirements for new sterilizers, see the CSA’s:
> 72314.0-13, ‘Medical Device Reprocessing - General Requirements’
> 2314.3-09, ‘Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’*
> 2314.2-09, ‘Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Ethylene Oxide Process’*”
MONITORS AND INDICATORS
Physical, biological and chemical monitoring is done to verify the effectiveness of sterilizers and the sterilizing
process. Monitoring is done when a sterilizer is first installed before it is put into general use and to assess
routine performance thereafter. See Section 2.K., ‘Sterilization of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices’, for
more information about routine monitoring. Performance monitoring using all three types of
indicators/monitors must be completed in all sterilizers to ensure that effective sterilization has been achieved.
All sterilizers must be tested for performance using physical, chemical and biological monitors and
indicators.
Physical Monitors
A physical monitor is a device that monitors the physical parameters of a sterilizer, such as time, temperature
and pressure that are measured during the sterilization cycle and recorded (as a printout or electronic record)
on completion of each cycle.
Biological Indicators (BI)
A biological indicator is a test system containing viable microorganisms (e.g., spore-laden strips or vials)
providing a defined resistance to a specified sterilization process.” ”° The BI is generally contained inside a

process challenge device (PCD) that simulates the in-use challenges presented by packaged devices. Once
sterilized, a Bl is incubated to see if the microorganism will grow, which indicates a failure of the sterilizer.
The manufacturer’s instructions regarding the type of BI to be used in a particular sterilizer should be followed.
The recommended test microorganisms generally used as Bls are:
Geobacillus stearothermophilus (formerly Bacillus stearothermophilus) spores for sterilizers that use steam,
hydrogen peroxide gas plasma or peracetic acid, as well as immediate use steam sterilizers
Bacillus atrophaeus (formerly Bacillus subtilis) spores for sterilizers that use dry heat or ethylene oxide.
The BI is incubated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Most Bls require up to 48 hours of incubation
before the test is complete. However, rapid readout biological indicators are available that provide BI results in
one hour. These indicators detect enzymes of Geobacillus stearothermophilus (the test organism for steam
sterilizers) by reading a fluorescent product produced by the enzymatic breakdown of a nonfluorescent
substrate.”° Studies have shown that the sensitivity of rapid-readout tests for steam sterilization (1 hour for
132°C gravity sterilizers, 3 hours for 121°C gravity and 132°C vacuum sterilizers) parallels that of the
conventional sterilization-specific Bls.°*” *°
> Refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’ [CSA Z314.3-09
Clause 12.6.4] for more information about biological indicators for steam sterilizers.
> Refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Ethylene Oxide Process” [CSA
Z314.2-09 Clause 12.6.4] for more information about biological indicators for ethylene oxide sterilizers.
Chemical indicators do not replace the need to use a biological indicator.
Chemical Indicators (Cl)
A chemical indicator is a system that responds to a change in one or more predefined process variables with a
chemical or physical change. There are six classes of chemical indicators’ (see Table 2, ‘International Classes of
Steam Chemical Indicators’).
Chemical indicators do not indicate that a device is sterile and do not replace the need to use a BI, but do
indicate that the package has been processed through a sterilization cycle.”
> Refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’ [CSA Z314.3-09
Clause 12.6.3] for more information about chemical indicators for steam sterilizers.
> Refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Ethylene Oxide Process” [CSA
Z314.2-09 Clause 12.6.3] for more information about chemical indicators for ethylene oxide sterilizers.

Table 2: International Classes of Steam Chemical Indicators
Class Definition Use Examples
CLASS |: Indicators that differentiates e — Used with individual units (e.g., e Indicator tapes
Process processed from non-processed packs, containers) to indicate that e Indicator labels
Indicators items the item has been directly exposed e Load cards
to the sterilization process
e Usually applied to the outside of
packages
e Respond to one or more critical
process variables
CLASS II: Indicator for use in specific test e Used for equipment control to e Bowie-Dick test
Indicator for procedures as defined in evaluate the sterilizer performance
Use in Specific _ sterilizer/sterilization standards
Tests (e.g., air-detection, steam
penetration)
CLASS III: Indicator that reacts to a single e May be used for monitoring process e Temperature
Single critical variable in the sterilization control but not as useful as class IV tubes
Variable process to indicate when a or class V indicators
Indicator specified value has been reached e¢ May be used for exposure control
(e.g., temperature at a specific monitoring (e.g., temperature at a
location in the chamber) specific location in the chamber)
CLASS IV: Indicator that reacts to two or e May be used for process control e Paper strips
Multi-variable more critical variables in the
Indicator sterilization cycle under the
conditions specified by the
manufacturer
CLASS V: Indicator that reacts to all critical ©. Responds to critical variables in the
Integrating variables in the sterilization same way that a BI responds
Indicator process (time, temperature, e Equivalent to, or exceeds, the
presence of steam) and has performance requirements of Bls
stated values that correlate to a e Used for process control
BI at three time/temperature e May be used as an additional
relationships monitoring tool to release loads
that do not contain implants
CLASS VI: Indicator that reacts to all critical ¢ Used asinternal Cl for process
Emulating variables (time, temperature, control
Indicator presence of steam) fora specified e A different Class VI emulating
sterilization cycle (e.g., 10 min., indicator is required for each
18 min., 40 min.) sterilization cycle time and
temperature used
e Cannot be used as an additional
monitoring tool to release loads
that do not contain implants
Process Challenge Device (PCD)
A process challenge device (PCD) is a test device intended to provide a challenge to the sterilization process that
is equal to, or greater than, the challenge posed by the most difficult item routinely processed.’ Examples
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 39

include BI test packs which also contain a chemical indicator, or Cl test packs which contain a Class 5 integrating
indicator or an enzyme-only indicator.
During routine monitoring of sterilizers, a PCD containing the BI and/or Cl is usually placed in the sterilizer. A
PCD can be commercially manufactured or prepared in-house.
> Refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’ [CSA Z314.3-09
Clause 12.12] for more information about in-house preparation of PCDs.
> Refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’ [CSA Z314.3-09
Clause 12.2.2] for more information about PCDs.
ROUTINE MONITORING OF STERILIZERS
Routine monitoring verifies that the sterilization process is working as expected and that medical
equipment/devices achieve sterility. Routine monitoring of sterilizers involves the assessment of physical
parameters of the sterilizer cycle, chemical indicators and biological indicators. All monitoring must comply with
the manufacturer’s instructions.
The following are included in routine monitoring” *:
record and initial results of physical, chemical and biological parameters (see Section 2.K., ‘Sterilization of
Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices’, for more information on indicators)
document daily operation of the sterilizer:
= review physical monitoring parameters for each operation (e.g., printed or electronic records)
= note any malfunction and take appropriate action to ensure that the product either has been
properly treated or is returned for reprocessing
test filter systems for leakage
validate gas sterilization units for such factors as gas concentration, temperature, and relative humidity
conduct three consecutive tests with the air detection test pack (Bowie-Dick) for sterilizers of the dynamic
air removal type
monitor dry heat sterilization with each cycle due to differences in penetration with different items.
Sterilization indicators shall” *:
be used according to the indicator manufacturer’s instructions
be used only for the sterilizer type and cycle for which it was designed and validated
be interpreted only by qualified staff who have been trained to do so
not be used beyond the expiration date
be stored in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
The following requirements apply to chemical monitoring’:
An internal chemical indicator shall be placed inside each package, container or bundle that is undergoing
sterilization in the area judged to be least accessible to steam penetration or to the sterilizing agent®” *°;
this may not necessarily be at the centre of the package; the class of indicator chosen is based on the
parameters being measured and the degree of precision that is needed.
Each package or container to be sterilized shall have an externally visible Class | chemical indicator,
which is examined immediately after sterilization to make sure that the item has been exposed to the
sterilization process.

For dynamic air removal-type sterilizers, an air removal test with a Class Il chemical indicator shall be
performed every day the sterilizer is used (see Section 2.K, ‘Sterilization of Reusable Medical
Equipment/Devices’).
The following requirements apply to biological monitoring’:
A biological indicator shall be used to test the sterilizer each day that it is used and with each type of cycle
that is used that day.
A biological indicator shall be included in every load that is to be sterilized with ethylene oxide.”
A biological indicator shall be included in every load containing implantable devices.”*
Items in the processed load should not be released until the results of the BI test are available; if
quarantine pending BI results is not possible, evaluation of a Class 5 or 6 chemical indicator and the specific
cycle physical parameters may be used to justify the release of routine loads.
Implantable devices shall be quarantined until the results of the BI test are available.
> Refer to Appendix G, ‘Advantages and Disadvantages of Currently Available Reprocessing Options’ for
sterilizer-specific monitoring criteria
ETHYLENE OXIDE (ETO)
Ethylene oxide is a designated substance under the Occupational Health & Safety Act.”’ Facilities that use
ethylene oxide for sterilization must comply with the requirements of the designated substance regulation —
ethylene oxide (O. Reg. 841/90), made under the OHSA; as well as guidelines from Environment Canada,®
specifically:
Emissions of ethylene oxide must be reduced by 99% during the sterilization cycle by installing an emission
control system.
Emissions of ethylene oxide must be reduced by 95% during aeration.
Eliminate liquid discharge to avoid releases of ethylene oxide to the local sewer system.
Test emissions of ethylene oxide annually.
Report annually to Environment Canada.
In order to safely operate an ethylene oxide sterilizer, the following must be included in the process™:
Product-specific WHMIS documentation shall be obtained from the manufacturer.
Handling, storage and disposal of ethylene oxide cylinders and cartridges shall be in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
At the conclusion of a sterilization cycle and before the load is removed, the operator shall check the
recording chart printout to ensure that required parameters have been met; if the chart or printout
indicates a failure of any parameter, the operator shall follow the health care setting’s applicable policies
and procedures.”
Medical equipment/devices sterilized with ethylene oxide shall be thoroughly aerated prior to handling or
use, according to the equipment/device manufacturer’s recommendations; reprocessing staff shall not
interrupt the aeration cycle to retrieve items for use.
> For more information regarding sterilizing with ethylene oxide, refer to the CSA’s Effective Sterilization in
Health Care Facilities by the Ethylene Oxide Process.**

Recommendations
51. Critical medical equipment/devices shall be sterilized. [CSA Z314.8]
52. The manufacturer’s instructions shall be followed for installation, operation and preventive
maintenance of sterilizing equipment. [CSA Z314.8]
53. The sterilization process shall be validated and documented with written policies and procedures.
[CSA Z314.0]
54. The sterilization process shall be tested, monitored with results recorded, and audited. [CSA Z314.0]
55. A biological indicator shall be used to test the sterilizer each day and for each type of cycle that it is
used; in every load subjected to ethylene oxide sterilization; and in every load containing implantable
devices. [CSA 2314.3]
56. Input from a professional with infection prevention and control expertise shall be obtained prior to the
purchase of a new sterilizer. [CSA 2314.8]
57. Sterilizers shall be subjected to rigorous testing and monitoring on installation and following
disruptions to their normal activity. [CSA 2314.0]
L. Immediate-Use Steam Sterilization (‘Flash Sterilization’)
Immediate-use steam sterilization (IUSS) shall only be used in emergency situations and shall not be used for
implantable equipment/devices” ** *° or on complete sets or trays of instruments.’ Sterilization is a process, not
an event. Operative scheduling and lack of instrumentation do not qualify as reasons to use IUSS.
Effective sterilization is impaired if all the necessary parameters of the process are not met. These include, but
are not limited to, the following:
Decontamination and sterilization areas must meet the requirements for processing space as noted in
Appendix C, ‘Recommendations for Physical Space for Reprocessing’, and shall not be located in the
Operative procedure room or near any potential source of contamination, such as sinks, hoppers, linen or
trash disposal areas.’
A record is kept for each piece of equipment/device being subjected to IUSS that includes the name of the
client/patient/resident, procedure, physician/practitioner and equipment/device used.’ The
client/patient/resident record should also reflect this information.
Mechanical and chemical indicators are used for each sterilization cycle and are checked at the end of
the cycle.”
A biological indicator is used each day the sterilizer is used.”
Sterility of instruments is maintained during removal from the sterilizer and transport to the point of use
(e.g., transport in a sterile covered container).’
The load printout must be signed to verify that the required time, temperature and pressure have been achieved.
Records must be retained according to the facility’s policy.’
There must be a procedure for notification of the client/patient/resident in the event of a recall (e.g.,
positive biological indicator).
Records should be reviewed on a regular basis to correct issues relating to overuse of IUSS.
> For more information regarding the use and requirements of IUSS, refer to CSA Standard Z314.3-09,
Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process [Section 13].

Recommendation
58. Immediate-use steam sterilization shall only be used in emergency situations and must never be used
for implantable equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.0]

M. Reprocessing Endoscopy Equipment/Devices
For the purposes of this document, endoscopes will be considered to be of two types:
Critical Endoscope: Endoscopes used in the examination of critical spaces, such as joints and sterile
cavities. Many of these endoscopes are rigid with no lumen. Examples of critical endoscopes are
arthroscopes and laparoscopes. Critical endoscopes shall be sterilized prior to use.
Semicritical Endoscope: Fibreoptic or video endoscopes used in the examination of the hollow viscera.
These endoscopes generally invade only semicritical spaces, although some of their components might
enter tissues or other critical spaces. Examples of semicritical endoscopes are laryngoscopes,
nasopharyngeal endoscopes, transesophageal probes, colonoscopes, gastroscopes, duodenoscopes,
sigmoidoscopes and enteroscopes. Semicritical endoscopes require a minimum of high-level disinfection
prior to use.
Opinions differ regarding the reprocessing requirements for flexible bronchoscopes and cystoscopes. Since
they are entering a sterile cavity, it is preferred that bronchoscopes and cystoscopes be sterilized; however,
if the cystoscope or bronchoscope is not compatible with sterilization, high-level disinfection is the
minimum requirement.
Due to the complexity of their design, flexible fibreoptic and video endoscopes (‘semicritical endoscopes’)
require special cleaning and handling.*“°
EDUCATION AND TRAINING
Individuals responsible for reprocessing endoscopes require training and must meet the health care setting’s
written endoscope processing competency requirements, which include ongoing education and training:"” **

= Staff assigned to reprocess endoscopes must receive device-specific reprocessing instructions to ensure

proper cleaning and high-level disinfection or sterilization.
= Competency testing of personnel reprocessing endoscopes shall be performed at least annually and
documented.“

= Staff shall not be allowed to reprocess endoscopes until competency has been established.”°

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 43

PHYSICAL SPACE
The area used to reprocess endoscopes must include’” “°*?:
a design that accommodates proper workflow from dirty to clean with adequate separation to minimize
risk of cross-contamination
adequate space for the storage and holding of soiled materials/equipment that is separate from other
activities and is controlled to prohibit public contact
dedicated processing room(s) for cleaning and decontaminating instruments that are physically separated
from clean areas, client/patient/resident care areas and procedure rooms
within processing/decontamination areas, utility sink(s) appropriate to the volume of work and method of
decontamination and a separate hand washing station
eye-washing facilities
sufficient cleanable counter space to handle the volume of work
space and utility connections for automatic endoscope reprocessor(s) (AER), if used
ventilation system that will remove toxic vapours generated by, or emitted from, cleaning or disinfecting agents:
= The vapour concentration of the chemical disinfectant used shall not exceed allowable limits”
(e.g., 0.05 ppm for glutaraldehyde).
= Air-exchange equipment (e.g., ventilation system, exhaust hoods) should be used to minimize
the exposure of all persons to potentially toxic vapours.”
m= In-use disinfectant solutions must be maintained in closed, covered, labelled containers at all times.
= Air quality should be monitored on a scheduled basis to ensure control of vapours.
negative pressure ventilation and a minimum air-exchange rate of 10 per hour for
processing/decontamination areas’
adequate space for the storage and holding of clean materials/equipment that is separate from other
activities, has adequate positive pressure ventilation and is controlled to prohibit public contact
CLEANING PROCEDURES
Each health care setting in which endoscopic procedures are performed shall have written detailed procedures
for the cleaning and handling of endoscopes.”* Endoscopic cleaning shall take place immediately following
completion of the clinical procedure,“ as soil residue in endoscope lumens dries rapidly, becoming very difficult
to remove.
Immediately following completion of the endoscopy procedure” *?:
Flush and wipe the endoscope at point-of-use with a soft lint-free cloth or endoscope sponge.
Use a freshly prepared enzymatic cleaning solution.
Place the endoscope and accessories in a covered, leak proof container and transport to the designated
decontamination area.
The following steps must be included in the cleaning procedure” 7?“ *:
Follow the manufacturer’s recommendations for cleaning and cleaning products.
Perform leak testing after each use, prior to cleaning:
= Verify the patency and integrity of the endoscope sheath through leak testing, performed prior
to, and during, immersion of the endoscope.
= Perform the leak test according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
= Anendoscope that fails the dry leak test should not undergo the immersion leak test.

Soak and manually clean all immersible endoscope components with water and a recommended cleaning
agent prior to automated or further manual disinfection or sterilization.
Disconnect and disassemble endoscope components (e.g., air/water and suction valves) as far as possible
and completely immerse the endoscope and components in enzymatic cleaner.
Flush and brush all channels and lumens of the endoscope while submerged to remove debris and
minimize aerosols.
Ensure that brushes used for cleaning lumens are of an appropriate size, inspected before and after use,
and discarded (or cleaned, high-level disinfected and dried following use).
Consider irrigation adaptors or manifolds that may be recommended by the manufacturer to facilitate cleaning.
Thoroughly rinse endoscope and all components with clean, fresh tap water prior to
disinfection/sterilization and remove excess rinse water from channels by purging with forced air.
Identify damaged endoscopes and immediately remove from service.
Discard enzymatic cleaner after each use.
Discard disposable cleaning items or thoroughly clean and high-level disinfect/sterilize nondisposable items
between uses.
ENDOSCOPE DISINFECTION AND STERILIZATION
Procedures for disinfection and sterilization of endoscopes must ensure that a minimum of high-level
disinfection is used for all endoscopes and their accessories, excluding biopsy forceps and brushes (which
require sterilization).”° The following steps must be included in the disinfection/sterilization procedure’” 79 “°*?:
Choose a disinfectant that is compatible with the endoscope.
Monitor the efficacy of the disinfectant before each use with test strips available from the product
manufacturer.
Maintain a written log of monitoring test results.
Do not use disinfectants past their expiry date.
Carefully follow the manufacturer’s directions regarding the ambient temperature and exposure time for
the disinfectant (e.g., 2% glutaraldehyde = 20 minutes at 20°C).
Completely immerse the endoscope and endoscope components in the high-level disinfectant/sterilant
and ensure all channels are perfused.
Following disinfection, rinse the endoscope and flush the channels. It is preferable that filtered or sterile
water be used."* Depending on the intended use of the device, tap water followed by a 70-90% alcohol
rinse may be acceptable.” High-level disinfection of cystoscopes should be followed by a sterile water
rinse.”? Rinse water must be discarded after each use/cycle.”
A disposable sheath/condom placed over the endoscope during use reduces the numbers of microorganisms
on the scope but does not eliminate the need for cleaning/disinfection/sterilization between uses.“
BIOPSY FORCEPS AND BRUSHES
Because of the difficulty cleaning biopsy forceps/brushes, it is strongly recommended that disposable items be
used. If endoscopic accessories (e.g., biopsy forceps and brushes) that break the mucosal barrier are to be
reused, they must be sterilized after each use.” ”* If reusable biopsy forceps/brushes are used, they must be
meticulously cleaned prior to sterilization using ultrasonic cleaning.
AUTOMATED ENDOSCOPE REPROCESSOR (AER)
If an automated endoscope reprocessor (AER) is used, the following must be included in the procedure*”*?:
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for use of the AER.

Ensure that the endoscope and endoscope components to be reprocessed are compatible with the AER used.
Ensure that channel connectors and caps for both the AER and the endoscope are compatible.
Place brushes and instruments used to clean the endoscope in the AER for disinfection.
Do not open or stop the AER once started; if an AER cycle is interrupted, high-level disinfection
cannot be assured.
Routinely review Health Canada/OHA alerts and advisories and the scientific literature for reports of AER
deficiencies that may lead to infection (reprocessing and infection prevention and control staff).
Implement and document preventive maintenance program(s) for the AER(s).
DRYING AND STORAGE OF ENDOSCOPES
Steps in the final drying of semicritical endoscopes include’””:
initial flushing of all channels with medical or filtered air
flushing all channels with 70% isopropyl alcohol to aid in the drying process
second flushing of the channels with medical or filtered air” “* or drying in a HEPA-filtered drying cabinet.”
If an AER that includes a drying cycle is used, consult the AER manufacturer to determine whether the rinse with
70% isopropyl alcohol and forced air drying are required.“
Storage procedures must include the following’”*:
Remove caps, valves and other detachable components during storage and reassemble just before use;"”
store close to the endoscope in a manner that minimizes contamination.
Store endoscopes that have been sterilized in their sterilization containers.
Do not allow endoscopes to coil, touch the floor or bottom of the cabinet while handing, or be stored in
their cases.
Store semicritical endoscopes by hanging vertically in a dedicated, closed, ventilated cabinet outside of the
decontamination area and procedure room.”
HEPA —filtered channel purge drying cabinets should be used for storage.”
Ensure that endoscope storage cabinets are constructed of non-porous material that can be cleaned.
Clean and disinfect endoscope storage cabinets at least weekly with an approved low-level
disinfectant/cleaner.
Colonoscopes have a maximum shelf life of 7 days, if stored dry.*° There are no recommendations regarding
shelf life of other types of endoscopes.
EQUIPMENT USED FOR CLEANING
The water bottle and its connecting tube, used for cleaning the endoscope lens and irrigation during ERCP
(endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography) procedures, shall be cleaned and sterilized following
manufacturer’s instructions.*” “° ** Sterile water shall be used to fill the water bottle.
RECORD-KEEPING
An accurate, permanent record of endoscope use and reprocessing will assist in tracking endoscopes and
clients/patients/residents in the event of a recall or follow-up:
For each procedure, document the client/patient/resident’s name and record number, the date and time
of the procedure, the type of procedure, the endoscopist, and the serial number or other identifier of both
the endoscope and the AER (if used) to assist in outbreak investigation.’” “°

Record the endoscope number in the client/patient/resident record.*” “°
Retain records according to the policy of the facility.’*
> For more information regarding reprocessing of endoscopes, see:
the CSA’s Z314.8-08 Decontamination of Reusable Medical Devices, Section 13."
PHAC’s Infection Prevention and Control Guideline for Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopy and
Flexible Bronchoscopy," available at : http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/nois-sinp/guide/endo/index-
eng.php.
Recommendations

59. Individuals responsible for reprocessing endoscopes shall be specially trained and shall meet the
facility’s written endoscope processing competency requirements, including ongoing education and
training and annual competency testing. [CSA 2314.0, CSA Z314.8]

60. Each health care setting in which endoscopic procedures are performed shall have written, detailed
procedures for the cleaning and handling of endoscopes. [CSA Z314.8]

61. Ventilation shall be such as to remove toxic vapours generated by, or emitted from, cleaning or
disinfecting agents. [CSA 2314.8, CSA Z317.2]

62. Endoscope cleaning shall commence immediately following completion of the clinical procedure. [CSA
2314.8]

63. Patency and integrity of the endoscope sheath shall be verified through leak testing, performed after
each use. [CSA Z314.8]

64, Endoscopic equipment/devices shall be rinsed and excess water removed prior to disinfection or
sterilization. [CSA Z314.8]

65. Critical endoscopes shall be sterilized. [CSA 2314.8]

66. Semicritical endoscopes and accessories (excluding biopsy forceps and brushes) shall receive at least
high-level disinfection after each use. [CSA 2314.8]

67. Endoscopic accessories (e.g., biopsy forceps and brushes) that enter sterile tissue or the vascular
system shall be disposable or sterilized after each use. [CSA Z314.8]

68. If an automated endoscope reprocessor (AER) is used, the endoscope and endoscope components shall
be compatible with the AER. [CSA 2314.8]

69. Final drying of semicritical endoscopes shall be facilitated by flushing all channels with filtered air,
followed by 70% isopropyl alcohol, followed by forced air purging of the channels. The alcohol and final air
purging steps may not be necessary if storing in a channel purge storage cabinet. [CSA 2314.8]

70. Semicritical endoscopes shall be stored hanging vertically in a dedicated, closed, ventilated cabinet
outside of the decontamination area and procedure room. Endoscopes shall not be coiled, allowed to
touch the floor or bottom of the cabinet while hanging, or stored in their cases. [CSA Z314.8]

71. The water bottle and its connecting tube, used for cleaning the endoscope lens and irrigation during
ERCP (endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography) procedures, shall be cleaned and sterilized
following manufacturer’s instructions. [CSA 2314.8]

72. A preventive maintenance program for automated endoscope reprocessor (AER) shall be implemented
and documented. [CSA 2314.0]

73. Healthcare settings shall have policies in place providing a permanent record of endoscope use and
reprocessing, as well as a system to track endoscopes and clients/patients/residents that includes
recording the endoscope number in the client/patient/resident record. [CSA Z314.8]

N. Unacceptable Methods of Disinfection/Sterilization

The following methods of disinfection/sterilization are not recommended.

BOILING

The use of boiling water to clean instruments and utensils is not an effective means of sterilization.”* Boiling
water is inadequate for the destruction of bacterial spores and some viruses.

ULTRAVIOLET IRRADIATION

The germicidal effectiveness of ultraviolet (UV) radiation is influenced by organic matter, wavelength, type of
suspension, temperature, type of microorganism and UV intensity, which is affected by distance and dirty
tubes.”® The application of UV light in the health care setting is limited to the destruction of airborne organisms
(e.g., ventilation ducts) or inactivation of microorganisms located on surfaces (e.g., laboratory hoods). It is not
an acceptable method of disinfection/sterilization for medical equipment/devices.”°

GLASS BEAD STERILIZATION

Glass bead sterilizers use small glass beads and high temperature for brief exposure times to inactivate
microorganisms.” Glass bead sterilizers are difficult to monitor for effectiveness, have inconsistent heating
resulting in cold spots, and often have trapped air which affects the sterilization process.

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has determined that a risk of infection exists with this equipment
because of their potential failure to sterilize dental instruments and has required their commercial distribution
cease until the device has received FDA clearance.”® “ Glass bead sterilization is not an acceptable method of
sterilization for medical equipment/devices.”* *”

CHEMICLAVE

A chemiclave is a machine that sterilizes surgical instruments by heating a chemical solution of primarily alcohol
with 0.23% formaldehyde in a closed pressurized chamber for 20 minutes. Chemiclaves are occasionally used in
dentistry, although steam sterilization is preferred due to the lack of penetration achieved in a chemiclave and
an overall failure rate of almost 5%.” If used, a chemiclave must be monitored with mechanical, chemical and
biological monitors as is any other sterilizer.

Formaldehyde is carcinogenic. Because of the environmental risks associated with formaldehyde, this method of
sterilization is no longer considered to be acceptable. If used, the process must be closely monitored,” local
regulations for hazardous waste disposal must be followed and air sampling for toxic vapours may be indicated.

MICROWAVE OVEN STERILIZATION
Microwave ovens are unreliable and difficult to monitor for effective sterilization. Home microwaves have been
shown to inactivate bacteria, viruses, mycobacteria and some spores, however there may not be even
distribution of microwave energy over the entire device.”” More research and testing are required to validate
the use of microwave ovens for sterilization. The use of microwave ovens for sterilization of medical
equipment/devices is not currently acceptable.”* *°
Recommendations
74. The following methods are not acceptable for achieving disinfection/sterilization: [BIII]
e boiling
e ultraviolet light
e glass bead sterilization
e microwave ovens
e chemiclave sterilization
O. Continued Monitoring and System Failures
RECALLS
Inadequate reprocessing includes, but is not limited to, the following situations:
The load contains a positive Bl.”
An incorrect reprocessing method was used on the equipment/device.
Print-outs on reprocessing equipment indicate failure to reach correct parameters (e.g., temperature,
pressure, exposure time).
Cl or monitoring tape has not changed colour.
There is doubt about the sterility of medical equipment/devices.””
A written procedure must be established for the recall and reprocessing of improperly reprocessed medical
equipment/devices.”’ All equipment/devices in each processed load must be recorded to enable tracking in the
event of a recall. Facilities should consider implementing commercial instrument tracking systems to facilitate
identification of patients in the event of a recall.
The recall procedure should include’:
designation of department and staff responsible for executing the recall’
identification of the medical equipment/devices to be recalled’; if recall is due to a failed BI, the recall shall
include the medical devices in the failed load as well as all other devices processed in the sterilizer since
the last successfully sterilized load*
assessment of client/patient/resident risk
procedure for subsequent notification of physicians, clients/patients/residents, other facilities and/or
regulatory bodies, if indicated
surveillance of clients/patients/residents, if indicated
quarantine of recalled items pending the results of investigation
involvement of the facility’s risk manager, if applicable.

Health care settings shall have a process for receiving and disseminating medical device alerts and recalls
originating from manufacturers or government agencies.”
Reusable medical devices that have been recalled due to a reprocessing failure shall be reprocessed prior to
use.
Recommendations
75. If a failed chemical indicator is found, the contents of the package shall be reprocessed before use.
[CSA Z314.3]
76. A procedure shall be established for the recall of improperly reprocessed medical equipment/devices.
[CSA Z314.0]
77. The recall procedure shall include assessment of client/patient/resident risk and a procedure for
subsequent notification of physicians, clients/patients/residents, other facilities and/or regulatory
bodies if indicated. [CSA 2314.0]
78. Health care settings shall have a process for receiving and disseminating medical device alerts and
recalls originating from manufacturers or government agencies. [CSA 2314.0]
P. Single-Use Medical Equipment/Devices
Health care settings must not internally reprocess single use medical equipment/devices. Critical and semi-
critical medical equipment/devices labelled as single-use must not be reprocessed and re-used unless the
reprocessing is done by a licensed reprocessor.°” ” Currently there are no licensed reprocessors in Canada.
There are reprocessors in the USA licensed by the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).
Health care settings that wish to have their single-use medical equipment/devices reprocessed by a licensed
reprocessor should ensure that the reprocessor’s facilities and procedures have been certified by a regulatory
authority or an accredited quality system auditor to ensure the cleanliness, sterility, safety and functionality of
the reprocessed equipment/devices.”* If a facility enters into a contract with a 3 party reprocessor, the liability
for adverse outcomes in the event of improper sterilization, or changes to equipment functionality, must be
clear to both parties.
In order to have single-use critical or semicritical medical equipment/devices reprocessed by one of these
facilities, there must be processes for:
tracking and labelling equipment/devices
recalling improperly reprocessed medical equipment/devices
assuring proof of sterility or high-level disinfection
testing for pyrogens
maintenance of equipment/device functionality and integrity
quality assurance and quality control
reporting adverse events
provision of good manufacturing procedures.

Single-use medical equipment/devices
are usually labelled by the
manufacturer with a symbol:

Whereas reusable medical equipment/devices are sold with instructions for proper cleaning and sterilization, no
such instructions exist for single-use medical equipment/devices. Furthermore, manufacturers often have not
provided data to determine whether the equipment/device can be thoroughly cleaned, whether the materials
can withstand heat or chemical sterilization, or whether delicate mechanical and electrical components will
continue to function after one or more reprocessing cycles.”*
In circumstances where the manufacturer does not approve of reuse, the facility may bear the brunt of legal
responsibility in establishing when and under what conditions reuse of medical equipment/devices presents no
increased risk to clients/patients/residents and that a reasonable standard of care was adhered to in the reuse
of the equipment/device. This would involve written policies, extensive testing of reprocessing protocols and
strict adherence to quality assurance investigations. This is a detailed and expensive process and should only be
undertaken if there is a compelling reason to do so.
SHARPS
Sharps are devices that can cause occupational injury to a worker. Some examples of sharps which cannot be
safely cleaned include needles, lancets, blades and glass. Reprocessing needles is an occupational health hazard.
Further, reprocessing needles is a patient safety issue as there is no guarantee that the lumen is clean and that
the reprocessing is effective. Needles must be single-use and must not be reprocessed.
When purchasing sharps or devices with sharp components that cannot be safely cleaned, single-use devices or
components shall be considered.” **
EQUIPMENT/DEVICES WITH SMALL LUMENS
Reusable equipment/devices with small lumens or other characteristics that make them difficult to clean
effectively can put clients/patients/residents at risk, as they cannot be cleaned effectively or be adequately
checked for cleanliness during reprocessing.” “* This includes items such as catheters, drains and fine cannulae
(excluding endoscopy equipment). These items should be designated single-use and not be reprocessed and re-
used, even if designated as reusable by the manufacturer.
EQUIPMENT/DEVICES IN HOME HEALTH CARE
Equipment/devices owned by the client that are re-used in their home must be adequately cleaned prior to reuse.
Home health care agencies may consider re-using single-use semicritical medical equipment/devices for a single client
in their home when reuse is safe and the cost of replacing the equipment/device is prohibitive for the client.

> See Section 2.1., ‘Disassembly, Inspection and Cleaning of Reusable Medical Equipment’, for cleaning

requirements.

Recommendations

79. The health care setting must have written policies regarding single-use medical equipment/devices. [AlII]

80. Critical and semi-critical medical equipment/devices labelled as single-use must not be reprocessed
and re-used unless the reprocessing is done by a licensed reprocessor. [All]

81. Needles must be single-use and must not be reprocessed. [Al]

82. It is strongly recommended that catheters, drains and other medical equipment/devices with small
lumens (excluding endoscopy equipment) be designated single-use and not be reprocessed and re-
used, even if designated as reusable by the manufacturer. [All]

83. Home health care agencies may consider re-using single-use semicritical medical equipment/devices
for a single client in their home when reuse is safe and the cost of replacing the equipment/device is
prohibitive for the client. [AIII]

Q. Storage and Use of Reprocessed Medical Equipment/Devices
The shelf life of a sterile package is event-related rather than time-related.’ Event-related shelf life is based on
the concept that items that have been properly decontaminated, wrapped, sterilized, stored and handled will
remain sterile indefinitely, unless the integrity of the package is compromised (i.e., open, wet, dirty). If the
integrity of the package is compromised, the item can no longer be considered to be sterile and it must be
reprocessed again before use.
STORAGE AREAS FOR STERILE ITEMS
The storage area for sterile items should be located adjacent to the sterilization area, preferably in a separate,
enclosed, limited-access area.” * Requirements for this area include” ” *”*:
Adequate storage space is provided to prevent crushing or damage to packages.
Environmental controls:
= temperature maintained between 18 and 23°C
= relative humidity maintained between 30% and 60%
Containers used for storage of clean equipment/devices should be moisture-resistant and cleanable (i.e.,
cardboard boxes must not be used).
Equipment/devices are stored in a clean, dry, dust-free area (closed shelves); not at floor level, on window
sills, or under sinks; and are protected from debris, drains, moisture and vermin to prevent contamination.
Shelving requirements:
= constructed of materials that are non-porous on all surfaces, non-shedding, easily cleanable, and
free of burrs and sharp or rough edges
= top and bottom shelves shall be solid
= if open shelving units are used for storage of sterilized medical devices, the shelves should be at least
25 cm (10 in) off the floor, 46 cm (18 in) from the ceiling, and 50 cm (2 in) from an outside wall
Equipment/devices are stored in an area where they are not subject to tampering by unauthorized persons.
Supplies and materials not used for reprocessing will not be stored in storage areas used for sterile items.
Equipment/devices are transported in a manner that avoids contamination or damage to the
equipment/device.
Carts, bins and plastic totes that are used for transportation of sterile goods shall be cleaned in accordance
with health care setting policy.”

MAINTAINING STERILITY
Health care settings must have procedures for storage and handling of clean and sterile medical
equipment/devices that include” **:
Medical equipment/devices purchased as sterile must be used before the expiration date, if one is given.
Stock should be rotated, so that oldest stock can be used first.”
Sterility must be maintained until used.”*
Sterile packages that lose their integrity shall be re-sterilized prior to use.
Equipment/devices must be handled in a manner that prevents recontamination of the item.
USING STERILE EQUIPMENT/DEVICES
At point-of-use, upon opening the reprocessed medical equipment/device, a check must be made for integrity of
the packaging and the equipment/device. Those performing this inspection must be provided with education
that includes:
validating results of chemical tape and internal monitors, if present
visually inspecting the equipment/device for discolouration or soil; if present, the item is removed from
service and reprocessed
checking for defective equipment/devices and removing them from use
checking for dampness or wetness (e.g., high humidity); if present, reprocessing will be required
reassembly of equipment/device if required.
> Refer to Appendix C, ‘Recommendations for Physical Space for Reprocessing’
Recommendations
84. Sterility of sterile items shall be maintained until used. [CSA 2314.0]
85. Reprocessed medical equipment/devices shall be stored in a clean, dry, environmentally-controlled
location in a manner that minimizes contamination or damage. [CSA Z314.0]
86. At point-of-use, upon opening the reprocessed medical equipment/device, the integrity of the
packaging and the equipment/device must be checked; results of chemical monitors, if present, must
be validated; and equipment/devices must be reassembled, if required. [AlII]

Il. Summary of Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and
Sterilization of Medical Equipment/Devices in All Health
Care Settings

THIS SUMMARY TABLE IS INTENDED TO ASSIST WITH SELF-ASSESSMENT INTERNAL TO THE HEALTH CARE SETTING FOR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT PURPOSES. SEE COMPLETE

TEXT FOR RATIONALE.

ov
V8
5 r=
Recommendation x £ “2 Action Plan 2
c| Oo] & £
=| —/| 2° Cc
al .) Ss
E/ 2] ¢ 8
Sl al2 <
A. Purchasing and Assessing Medical Equipment/Devices and/or Products for Disinfection or Sterilization Processes
Medical equipment/devices that cannot be cleaned and
reprocessed according to the recommended standards shall
not be purchased or should be designated single-use. [CSA
2314.0]
When purchasing reprocessing equipment or chemical
products for reprocessing, consideration shall be given to
Occupational Health requirements, client/patient/resident
safety and environmental safety issues. [CSA Z314.0]
All medical equipment/devices intended for use ona
client/patient/resident that are being considered for purchase
or will be obtained in any other way (e.g., loaned
equipment/devices, trial or research equipment/devices,
physician/practitioner-owned) shall meet established quality
reprocessing parameters. Such equipment should not be
purchased or used until this process is established. [CSA
2314.0, CSA Z314.22]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 54

g
5| +
‘| § 5
Recommendation «| £] | Action Plan i}
&| 90 £ iy
2 3 8 5
z < Ls)
S| &\ 3 <
Manufacturers’ information for all medical
equipment/devices shall be received and maintained in a
format that allows for easy access by staff carrying out the
reprocessing activities. [CSA Z314.0]
Newly purchased, non-sterile critical and semicritical medical
equipment/devices must first be inspected and reprocessed
according to their intended use. [A1]
The organization shall develop and maintain policies and
procedures that apply to the sending, transporting, receiving,
handling and processing of loaned, shared and leased medical
equipment/devices, including endoscopes. [CSA Z314.0, CSA-
2314.22]
7. Because of the risks associated with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD), surgical instruments that are used on high risk
neurological and eye tissue from clients/patients/residents at
high risk for CJD must be quarantined after use and, if
diagnosis is confirmed, be disposed of by incineration
(preferably) or, alternatively, be subjected to rigorous
decontamination processes as detailed in the Health
Canada/Public Health Agency of Canada infection control
guideline, “Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in Canada”. [All]
There should be a centralized area for reprocessing medical
equipment/devices.[BIII]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 55

ou
cs)
c
S)¢ Fey
e| & =
Recommendation 2 E ‘2| Action Plan 2
c| oO; & s
a] | 3 5
E/E s 8
8| ai2 <
The decontamination work area must be physically separated
from clean areas by walls or partitions. [All]
Reprocessing performed outside the centralized area should
be kept to a minimum, must be approved by the reprocessing
committee or those accountable for safe reprocessing
practices and shall conform to the requirements for
reprocessing space. [CSA Z314.0]
Wherever chemical disinfection/sterilization is performed, air
quality shall be monitored when using products that produce
toxic vapours and mists. [CSA Z314.0, CSA Z314.23]
12. There shall be a regular schedule for environmental cleaning
in the Sterile Processing Department that includes written
procedures and clearly defined responsibilities. [CSA 2314.0]
C. Policies and Procedures
13. The health care setting shall, as a minimum, have policies and
procedures for all aspects of reprocessing that are based on
current recognized standards/recommendations and that are
reviewed at least annually. [CSA Z314.8]
All policies and procedures for reprocessing medical
equipment/devices shall be reviewed review by an individual
with infection prevention and control expertise. [CSA Z314.8]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 56

ou
cs)
c
S)¢ Fey
=| & =
Recommendation z E = Action Plan 8
oo) UO 4
a] | 3 5
E/ 2] ¢ 8
8| ai2 <
15. A procedure shall be established for the recall of improperly
reprocessed medical equipment/devices. [CSA 2314.0]
D. Education and Training
The policies of the health care setting shall specify the
requirements for, and frequency of, education and training as
well as competency assessment for all personnel involved in
the reprocessing of medical equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.0]
17. All aspects of reprocessing shall be supervised and shall be
performed by knowledgeable, trained personnel. [CSA Z314.0]
Managers, supervisors and staff involved in reprocessing shall
have completed a recognized qualification/certification course
in reprocessing practices. [CSA 2314.0]
E. Occupational Health and Safety for Reprocessing
Occupational Health and Safety for the health care setting
shall review all protocols for reprocessing medical
equipment/devices to verify that worker safety measures and
procedures to eliminate or minimize the risk of exposure are
followed and are in compliance with the Occupational Health
and Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1 and its Regulation including
the Health Care and Residential Facilities -O. Reg. 67/93
amended to O. Reg. 631/05. [CSA Z314.8, O. Reg 67/93]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 57

g
c
S)¢ Fey
e| & =
Recommendation F 5 = Action Plan ra
S| s| 3 5
E/E s 8
8| ai2 <
20. There shall be a policy that prohibits eating/drinking, storage
of food, smoking, application of cosmetics or lip balm and
handling contact lenses in the reprocessing area. [CSA Z314.0]
21. Appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE) shall be
worn for all reprocessing activities. [CSA 2314.0]
22. All staff working in reprocessing shall be offered Hepatitis B
immunization unless they have documented immunity to
Hepatitis B. [CSA Z314.0]
23. There shall be written measures and procedures to prevent
and manage injuries from sharp objects. [CSA Z314.0, O. Reg
67/93]
24, Measures and procedures shall be in place for immediate
response to worker exposure to bloodborne pathogens. [CSA
2314.0]
F. Transportation and Handling of Contaminated Medical Equipment/Devices
25. Disposable sharps shall be disposed of in an appropriate
puncture-resistant sharps container at point-of-use, prior to
transportation. [O. Reg. 67/93]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 58

g
c
S)¢ Fey
oe) 9 a=
Recommendation z E = Action Plan 8
=| 3| 8 =
Olal|2 4
26. Soiled medical equipment/devices shall be handled in a
manner that reduces the risk of exposure and/or injury to
personnel and clients/patients/residents, or contamination of
environmental surfaces, according to routine infection
prevention and control practices. [CSA Z314.8]
27. A process shall be in place that will ensure that medical
equipment/devices which have been reprocessed can be
differentiated from equipment/devices which have not been
reprocessed (e.g., colour coding). [CSA Z314.8]
28. Contaminated equipment/devices shall not be transported
through areas designated for storage of clean or sterile
supplies, client/patient/resident care areas or high-traffic
areas. [CSA 2314.8]
29. Sterile and soiled equipment/devices shall not be transported
together. [CSA 2314.8]
Products used for any/all stages in reprocessing (i.e., cleaning,
disinfection, sterilization) shall be approved by the committee
responsible for product selection, by an individual with
reprocessing expertise and by an individual with infection
prevention and control expertise. [CSA Z314.0]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 59

g
c
S)¢ Fey
oe) 9 a=
Recommendation z E = Action Plan 8
«| O 2
S| s| 3 5
E/E s 8
8| ai2 <
The reprocessing method, level and products required for
medical equipment/devices shall reflect the intended use of
the equipment/device and the potential risk of infection
involved in the use of the equipment/device. [CSA 2314.8]
32. Products used for decontamination shall be appropriate to the
level of reprocessing that is required for the use of the medical
equipment/device. [CSA Z314.8]
33. The process and products used for cleaning, disinfection
and/or sterilization of medical equipment/devices shall be
compatible with the equipment/devices. [CSA 2314.8]
All medical equipment/devices that will be purchased and will
be reprocessed shall have written device-specific
manufacturer’s cleaning, decontamination, disinfection,
wrapping and sterilization instruction. If disassembly or
reassembly is required, detailed instructions with pictures
shall be included. Staff training must be provided on these
processes before the medical equipment/device is placed into
circulation. [CSA Z314.8]
H. Factors Affecting the Efficacy of the Reprocessing Procedure
Factors that affect the ability to effectively clean medical
equipment/devices shall be considered prior to cleaning. [CSA
2314.8]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 60

ou
cs)
c
S)¢ Fey
oe) 9 a=
Recommendation z E = Action Plan 8
oo) UO -
S| s| 3 5
E/E s 8
8| al2 <
|. Disassembly, Inspection and Cleaning of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices
Reusable medical equipment/devices shall be thoroughly
cleaned before disinfection or sterilization. [CSA 2314.3, CSA
2314.8]
37. If cleaning cannot be done immediately, the medical
equipment/device shall be kept moist in a transport container
by using a product specifically intended for this use and in
accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. [CSA 2314.8]
The process for cleaning shall include written protocols for
disassembly, sorting, soaking, physical removal of organic
material, rinsing, drying, physical inspection, lubrication and
wrapping. [CSA Z314.8]
Audits of the cleaning process shall be done on a regular
basis. [CSA 2314.0]
J. Disinfection of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices
Noncritical medical equipment/devices shall be
decontaminated using a low-level disinfectant. [CSA Z314.8]
Asemicritical device shall be sterilized if it can be safely
sterilized according to manufacturer’s instructions. If a
semicritical device cannot be sterilized, then it shall, ata
minimum, be high-level disinfected, thermally disinfected or
pasteurized between uses. [CSA Z314.8]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 61

g
c
S)¢ Fey
e| & =
Recommendation 2 E ‘2| Action Plan 8
c| oO; & s
a] | 3 5
E/E § g
Olal|2 4
42. Noncritical and semicritical medical equipment/devices that
are owned by the client; re-used by that client and used only
by that client in their home; and not used for another purpose,
do not require disinfection between uses, provided that they
are adequately cleaned and stored dry between uses. [BIII]
43. All disinfectants shall have a Drug Identification Number (DIN)
from Health Canada. [CSA Z314.8]
The chemical disinfectant used for disinfecting medical
equipment/devices must be compatible with both the
equipment/device manufacturer’s instructions for disinfection
and the cleaning products involved in the reprocessing of the
equipment/device. [BIII]
Disinfectant manufacturers must supply recommendations for
the use and safe handling of the disinfectant. [BIII]
The process of high-level disinfection requires monitoring and
auditing. If a chemical product is used, the concentration of
the active ingredient(s) shall be verified and a logbook of daily
concentration test results shall be maintained. [CSA Z314.8]
47. Manufacturer’s instructions for installation, operation and
ongoing maintenance of pasteurizing equipment shall be
followed to ensure that the machine does not become
contaminated. [CSA 2314.8]
A preventive maintenance program for pasteurizing
equipment shall be implemented and documented. [CSA
2314.0]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 62

ou
cs)
c
\¢e Fy
oe) 9 =
Recommendation F 5 = Action Plan ra
S| s| 3 5
E/E s 8
8| ai2 <
Following the pasteurizing cycle, medical equipment/devices
shall be thoroughly dried in a drying cabinet that is equipped
with a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter and that is
used exclusively for the drying of pasteurized
equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.8]
50. A log of contents, temperature and time shall be maintained
for each pasteurizer cycle. [CSA Z314.8]
K. Sterilization of Reusable Medical Equipment/Devices
57. Critical medical equipment/devices shall be sterilized.[CSA
2314.8]
52. The manufacturer’s instructions shall be followed for
installation, operation and preventive maintenance of
sterilizing equipment. [CSA 2314.8]
53. The sterilization process shall be validated and documented
with written policies and procedures. [CSA 2314.0]
54. The sterilization process shall be tested, monitored with
results recorded, and audited. [CSA 2314.0]
55. A biological indicator shall be used to test the sterilizer each
day and for each type of cycle that it is used; in every load
subjected to ethylene oxide sterilization; and in every load
containing implantable devices. [CSA 2314.3]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 63

ou
cs)
c
S)¢ Fey
=| & =
Recommendation z E = Action Plan 8
oo) UO 4
S| s| 3 5
E/ tl} ¢ 8
8| ai2 <
Input from a professional with infection prevention and
control expertise shall be obtained prior to the purchase of a
new sterilizer. [CSA Z314.8]
57. Sterilizers shall be subjected to rigorous testing and
monitoring on installation and following disruptions to their
normal activity.[CSA 2314.0]
L. Immediate Use Steam Sterilization (‘Flash’ Sterilization)
Immediate-use steam sterilization shall only be used in
emergency situations and must never be used for implantable
equipment/devices. [CSA Z314.0]
M. Reprocessing Endoscopy Equipment/Devices
Individuals responsible for reprocessing endoscopes shall be
specially trained and shall meet the facility’s written
endoscope processing competency requirements, including
ongoing education and training and annual competency
testing. [CSA Z314.0, CSA 2314.8]
Each health care setting in which endoscopic procedures are
performed shall have written, detailed procedures for the
cleaning and handling of endoscopes. [CSA Z314.8]
Ventilation shall be such as to remove toxic vapours
generated by, or emitted from, cleaning or disinfecting
agents. [CSA 2314.8, CSA Z317.2]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 64

g
c
\¢e Fy
oe) 9 =
Recommendation F 5 = Action Plan ra
‘a| 3 9 5
E/ 2] ¢ 8
3| &| 2 <
62. Endoscope cleaning shall commence immediately following
completion of the clinical procedure. [CSA Z314.8]
Patency and integrity of the endoscope sheath shall be
verified through leak testing, performed after each use. [CSA
2314.8]
Endoscopic equipment/devices shall be rinsed and excess
water removed prior to disinfection or sterilization. [CSA
2314.8]
Semicritical endoscopes and accessories (excluding biopsy
forceps and brushes) shall receive at least high-level
disinfection after each use. [CSA 2314.8]
67. Endoscopic accessories (e.g., biopsy forceps and brushes) that
enter sterile tissue or the vascular system shall be disposable
or sterilized after each use. [CSA Z314.8]
If an automated endoscope reprocessor (AER) is used, the
endoscope and endoscope components shall be compatible
with the AER. [CSA 2314.8]

g
c
S)¢ Fey
=| & =
Recommendation F 5 = Action Plan 3
‘a| 3 9 5
E/E § g
Olal|2 4
Final drying of semicritical endoscopes shall be facilitated by
flushing all channels with filtered air, followed by 70%
isopropyl alcohol, followed by forced air purging of the
channels. The alcohol and final air purging steps may not be
necessary if storing in a channel purge storage cabinet. [CSA
2314.8]
70. Semicritical endoscopes shall be stored hanging vertically in a
dedicated, closed, ventilated cabinet outside of the
decontamination area and procedure room. Endoscopes shall
not be coiled, allowed to touch the floor or bottom of the
cabinet while hanging, or stored in their cases. [CSA Z314.8]
71. The water bottle and its connecting tube, used for cleaning
the endoscope lens and irrigation during ERCP (endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography) procedures, shall be
cleaned and sterilized following manufacturer’s instructions.
[CSA 2314.8]
72. A preventive maintenance program for automated endoscope
reprocessor (AER) shall be implemented and documented.
[CSA 2314.0]
73. Healthcare settings shall have policies in place providing a
permanent record of endoscope use and reprocessing, as well
as a system to track endoscopes and
clients/patients/residents that includes recording the
endoscope number in the client/patient/resident record. [CSA
2314.8]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 66

ou
cs)
c
S)¢ Fey
=| & =
Recommendation z E = Action Plan 8
oo) UO -
S| s| 3 5
E/ 2] ¢ 8
8| al2 <
N. Unacceptable Methods of Disinfection/Sterilization
74. The following methods are not acceptable for achieving
disinfection/sterilization: [BIII]
e boiling
e ultraviolet light
e glass bead sterilization
e microwave ovens
e chemiclave sterilization
O. Continued Monitoring and System Failures
75. If a failed chemical indicator is found, the contents of the
package shall be reprocessed before use. [CSA Z314.3]
76. A procedure shall be established for the recall of improperly
reprocessed medical equipment/devices. [CSA 2314.0]
77. The recall procedure shall include assessment of
client/patient/resident risk and a procedure for subsequent
notification of physicians, clients/patients/residents, other
facilities and/or regulatory bodies if indicated. [CSA 2314.0]
78. Health care settings shall have a process for receiving and
disseminating medical device alerts and recalls originating
from manufacturers or government agencies. [CSA Z314.0]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 67

ou
cs)
5| +
Recommendation 2 E ‘2| Action Plan 3
c| Oo] & £
=| —| o c
2| | ¢ 5
=) s o
S| &\ 3 <
P. Single-Use Medical Equipment/Devices
79. The health care setting must have written policies regarding
single-use medical equipment/devices. [All]
Critical and semi-critical medical equipment/devices labelled
as single-use must not be reprocessed and re-used unless the
reprocessing is done by a licensed reprocessor. [All]
82. It is strongly recommended that catheters, drains and other
medical equipment/devices with small lumens (excluding
endoscopy equipment) be designated single-use and not be
reprocessed and re-used, even if designated as reusable by the
manufacturer. [All]
83. Home health care agencies may consider re-using single-use
semicritical medical equipment/devices for a single client in
their home when reuse is safe and the cost of replacing the
equipment/device is prohibitive for the client. [AIII]
Q. Storage and Use of Reprocessed Medical Equipment/Devices
Sterility of sterile items shall be maintained until used. [CSA
2314.0]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 68

ou
fs]
8||
= >
‘| s £
Recommendation 2 E ‘2| Action Plan 3
oe
o| Oo] & 2
=; — ° c
Q) ©) 9 z
iS z < Ls)
[e)
3| &| 2 <
Reprocessed medical equipment/devices shall be stored ina
clean, dry location in a manner that minimizes contamination
or damage. [CSA Z314.0]
At point-of-use, upon opening the reprocessed medical
equipment/device, the integrity of the packaging and the
equipment/device must be checked; results of chemical
monitors, if present, must be validated; and
equipment/devices must be reassembled, if required. [AlII]
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 69

Ill. Appendices
Appendix A: Ranking System for Recommendations
Categories for strength of each recommendation

A Good evidence to support a recommendation for use.

B Moderate evidence to support a recommendation for use.

c Insufficient evidence to support a recommendation for or against use

D Moderate evidence to support a recommendation against use.

E Good evidence to support a recommendation against use.

Categories for quality of evidence on which recommendations are made

l Evidence from at least one properly randomized, controlled trial.

Evidence from at least one well-designed clinical trial without randomization,

Il from cohort or case-controlled analytic studies, preferably from more than one
centre, from multiple time series, or from dramatic results in uncontrolled
experiments.

"I Evidence from opinions of respected authorities on the basis of clinical
experience, descriptive studies, or reports of expert committees.

NOTE: When a recommendation is based on a regulation, no grading will apply.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 70

Appendix B: Reprocessing Decision Chart
MANUFACTURERS’ RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRODUCT, CONCENTRATION AND EXPOSURE TIME MUST BE
FOLLOWED
Level of Processing and _ Classification of Examples of Equipment/Devices Effective Products**
Reprocessing Equipment/
Device
Cleaning All reusable e ~All reusable equipment/devices ** concentration and
Physical removal of soil, equipment/devices ¢ Oxygen tanks and cylinders contact time are
dust or foreign material. dependant on
Chemical, thermal or manufacturer's
mechanical aids may be instructions
used. Cleaning usually e = Quaternary
involves soap and water, ammonium
detergents or enzymatic compounds (QUATs)
cleaners. Thorough e Enzymatic cleaners
cleaning is required e Soap and water
before disinfection or e Detergents
sterilization may take e 0.5% Enhanced
place. action formulation
hydrogen peroxide
Low-Level Disinfection Noncritical e Environmental surfaces touched by _=** concentration and
Level of disinfection equipment/devices staff during procedures involving contact time are
required when processing parenteral or mucous membrane dependant on
noncritical contact (e.g. dental lamps, dialysis manufacturer's
equipment/devices or machines) instructions
some environmental e Bedpans, urinals, commodes e 3% Hydrogen
surfaces. Low-level e Stethoscopes peroxide (30
disinfectants kill most e Blood pressure cuffs minutes)
vegetative bacteria and e  Oximeters e 60-95% Alcohol (10
some fungi as well as e Glucose meters minutes)
enveloped (lipid) viruses. e Electronic thermometers e Sodium hypochlorite
Low-level disinfectants do e Hydrotherapy tanks (bleach) (1000 ppm)
not kill mycobacteria or e = Client/patient/resident lift slings e 0.5% Enhanced
bacterial spores. e ECG machines/leads/cups etc. action formulation
e Sonography (ultrasound) hydrogen peroxide
equipment/probes that only contact (5 minutes)
intact skin e = Quaternary
e Bladder scanners ammonium
e Baby scales compounds (QUATs)
e =Cardiopulmonary training (10 minutes)
mannequins e —lodophors
e Environmental surfaces (e.g. IV e Phenolics ** (should
poles, wheelchairs, beds, call bells) not be used in
e Fingernail care equipment that is nurseries)
single-client/patient/resident use
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 71

MANUFACTURERS’ RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRODUCT, CONCENTRATION AND EXPOSURE TIME MUST BE
FOLLOWED
Level of Processing and _ Classification of Examples of Equipment/Devices Effective Products**
Reprocessing Equipment/

Device
High-Level Disinfection Semicritical e Flexible endoscopes that do not ** concentration and
The level of disinfection equipment/devices enter sterile cavities or tissues contact time are
required when processing e —_Laryngoscopes dependant on
semicritical e Bronchosopes, cystoscopes manufacturer's
equipment/devices. High- (sterilization is preferred) instructions
level disinfection e Respiratory therapy equipment e 22% Glutaraldehyde
processes destroy e Nebulizer cups (20 minutes at 20°C)
vegetative bacteria, e Anaesthesia equipment e 26% Hydrogen
mycobacteria, fungi and e — Endotrachial tubes peroxide (30
enveloped (lipid) and non- e = Specula (nasal, anal, vaginal — minutes)
enveloped (non-lipid) disposable equipment is strongly e =0.55% Ortho-
viruses, but not recommended) phthalaldehyde
necessarily bacterial e Tonometer foot plate (OPA) (10 minutes at
spores. e Ear syringe nozzles 20°C)

@ Sonography (ultrasound) e Pasteurization (30
equipment/probes that come into minutes at 71°C)
contact with mucous membranesor ¢ 2% Enhanced action
non-intact skin (e.g. transrectal formulation
probes) hydrogen peroxide

e  Pessary and diaphragm fitting rings (8 minutes at 20°C)

e = Cervical caps

e Breast pump accessories

e Glass thermometers

e — CPR face masks

e = Alligator forceps

e ~=Cryosurgery tips

e Ear cleaning equipment, ear
curettes, otoscope tips

e Fingernail care equipment used on
multiple clients/patients/residents

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 72

MANUFACTURERS’ RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRODUCT, CONCENTRATION AND EXPOSURE TIME MUST BE
FOLLOWED
Level of Processing and _ Classification of Examples of Equipment/Devices Effective Products**
Reprocessing Equipment/
Device
Sterilization Critical e = Surgical instruments ** concentration and
The level of reprocessing equipment/devices © Foot care equipment contact time are
required when processing e Implantable equipment/devices dependant on
critical e — Endoscopes that enter sterile manufacturer's
equipment/devices. cavities and spaces (e.g., instructions
Sterilization results in the arthroscopes, laparoscopes) e Steam autoclave
destruction of all forms of e Bronchosopes , cystoscopes e 100% Ethylene oxide
microbial life including (sterilization preferred) e Dry heat
bacteria, viruses, spores e Biopsy forceps, brushes and biopsy e Hydrogen peroxide
and fungi. equipment associated with gas plasma (75
endoscopy (disposable equipment is minutes at 50°C)
strongly recommended) e  Vapourized
e Colposcopy equipment hydrogen peroxide
e — Electrocautery tips (55 minutes)
e — Endocervical curettes e Ozone (4 hours)
e Fish hook cutters e Hydrogen
e = Transfer forceps peroxide/ozone
e Eye equipment, including soft combination
contact lenses e 22% Glutaraldehyde
e Dental equipment including high (10 hours at 20°C)
speed dental hand pieces e 0.2% Peracetic acid
(12 minutes at 50-
56°C)

e §6-25% hydrogen
peroxide liquid (6
hours)

e 2% Enhanced action
formulation
hydrogen peroxide
(6 hours at 20°C)

e 7% Enhanced action
formulation
hydrogen peroxide
(20 minutes at 20°C)

Adapted from:

(1) Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s ‘Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008’
[available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhgp/pdf/quidelines/Disinfection Nov _2008.pdf]

(2) Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Disinfection and sterilization: An overview. AJIC 2013;41:S2-S5.

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 73

Appendix C: Recommendations for Physical Space for Reprocessing

Personnel Recommendations:

1. Access to decontamination areas shall be restricted to authorized personnel as defined by departmental
policies.

2. Eating, drinking, smoking, applying cosmetics or lip balm, and handling of contact lenses shall not take
place in decontamination areas.

3. Storage of food, drink, or personal effects in decontamination areas shall be prohibited.

Space Recommendations:

1. There must be clear separations between soiled and clean areas":

a) | decontamination work areas should be physically separated from clean and other work areas by
walls or partitions to control traffic flow and to contain contaminants generated during the stages
of decontamination;

b) soiled work areas must be physically separated from all other areas of the space;

c) walls or partitions should be constructed of materials capable of withstanding frequent cleaning
with the cleaning and disinfecting products used in the health care setting;

d) doors to all work areas should be kept closed at all times; self-closing doors are recommended to
restrict access and optimize ventilation control; and

e) in healthcare facilities, doors should be pass-through, to ensure one-way movement by staff from
contaminated areas to clean areas.

2. There must be adequate space provided for decontamination equipment and materials used for
cleaning and reprocessing”:

a) work surfaces and surrounding areas should be designed to minimize crowding of work space;

b) work surfaces shall be flat, cut-resistant, seamless and composed of a non-porous material so they

can be cleaned, disinfected and dried; stainless steel surfaces are recommended;

c) counter tops should be waterproof and have a backsplash;

d) there should be at least two adjacent decontamination sinks; if only one or two sinks are available,

precautions should be taken to avoid recontaminating equipment/devices;

e) decontamination sinks should:

i) be at a height that allows staff to use them without bending or straining;
ii) be deep enough to immerse items to be cleaned;
iii) be large enough to accommodate trays or baskets of instruments;
iv) not have an overflow; and
v) be equipped with water ports for the flushing of instruments with lumens, if appropriate.
3. There must be an area for donning or removing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE):

If staff interchange is required between clean and contaminated areas, PPE shall be carefully removed

and hands thoroughly washed.

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 74

4. There must be easy access to hand hygiene facilities™’:
a) dedicated hand washing sinks must be provided;
b) hand washing sinks should be conveniently located in or near all decontamination and preparation
areas and at all entrances to and exits from the decontamination area;
c) hand washing facilities should also be located in all personnel support areas (e.g., change rooms);
d) “hands-free” operating sinks are recommended;
e) hand washing sinks must not be used for other purposes; and
f) accessible, adequately supplied and properly functioning soap dispensers, towel dispensers and
alcohol-based hand rub, shall be made available.
5. There must be easy access to emergency supplies™’:
a) eye-wash stations, deluge showers and spill equipment should be provided as necessary;
b) consult jurisdictional occupational health and safety statutes/regulations.
6. The reprocessing area is regularly and adequately cleaned” ™:
a) There is an area for storage of dedicated housekeeping equipment and supplies;
b) wet-vacuuming or hand-mopping with a clean mop head and clean, fresh water should be done at
least daily;
c) spills are cleaned up immediately; and
d) there is an area for waste.
Medical equipment/device reprocessing areas require a ‘Hospital Clean’ regimen that includes:
a) Insterile processing areas:
i) clean and disinfect all countertops, work areas, sinks and equipment surfaces at least daily;
ii) clean and disinfect sinks each shift at a minimum and more frequently as necessary;
iii) clean floors at least daily;
iv) clean shelves daily in sterilization areas, preparation and packing areas and decontamination
areas;
v) clean shelves every three months in sterile storage areas;
vi) clean case carts after every use;
vii) clean walls every six months; and
viii) clean light fixtures, sprinkler heads and other fixtures every six months.
b) In user units, clinics, endoscopy suites and other sterile storage areas:
i) clean and disinfect countertops, work areas and equipment surfaces at least daily;
ii) clean and disinfect sinks between each use;
iii) clean floors daily;
iv) clean shelves monthly;
v) clean walls every six months; and
vi) clean light fixtures, sprinkler heads and other fixtures every six months.
> For more information about ‘Hospital Clean’, see PIDAC’s Best Practices for Environmental Cleaning in All
Health Care Settings.°
7. There is adequate storage space:
a) there is an area for transportation equipment (e.g., carts, trolleys); and
b) clean supplies and PPE must be stored in a separate area from soiled items and cleaning processes.

Environment Recommendations
1. In healthcare facilities ventilation, temperature and humidity of the Sterile Processing Department
meets or exceeds CSA standards” ™:
a) CSA requirements for ventilation:
i) minimum 8 air changes per hour for soiled areas, 10 air changes per hour for clean areas
ii) minimum 2 outdoor air changes per hour for soiled areas, three outdoor air changes per
hour for clean areas
iii) soiled areas: negative pressure
iv) clean areas: positive pressure
v) exhaust air vented outdoors and not recirculated
vi) portable fans must not be used in any area of the sterile processing department
b) CSA recommendations for temperature and humidity:
i) room temperature of all decontamination work areas should be between 18-20°C and
between 20-23°C for clean areas
ii) relative humidity should be maintained between 30-60% (preferably 40-50%) and be
monitored daily
iii) an independent humidity monitor that is calibrated regularly should be used in each sterile
storage area
iv) if humidity increases such that sterile packages become damp or wet (e.g., > 70%), the
integrity of the package may be compromised’:
. immediately notify facility management and ensure that remedial action is taken
. remove as much inventory as possible from the affected area; consider moving off-site
if feasible
. if items are visibly damp or damaged, they must be repackaged and reprocessed; if
single-use, the item must be discarded
. if there is no visible effect of moisture, the items may be used
. if humidity reading after 24 hours is still >70%, a risk assessment must be performed
to determine which items can be used, reprocessed or discarded
2. Water used in the processing area should be tested and be free of contaminants:
[Refer to Annex F in the Canadian Standards Association’s ‘Decontamination of Reusable Medical
Devices’ CAN/CSA-Z314.8-08]
Water quality can be a significant factor in the success of decontamination procedures. In addition to
issues of mineral content (hardness or softness), piped water supplies can also introduce pathogens and
unwanted chemicals to decontamination processes. Manufacturers of medical equipment/devices,
decontamination equipment and detergents should be consulted regarding their particular water quality
requirements.
Water should appear colourless, clean and without sediment. Limiting values of water contaminants”:
e« pH: 6.5 to 8
° Evaporation residue: $15 mg/L
e Conductivity: < 50 us/cm
° Hardness: < 0.1 mmol/L

e« Cadmium: < 0.005 mg/L

e Chloride: < 3 mg/L

° lron: < 0.2 mg/L

° Lead: < 0.05 mg/L

° Phosphate: < 0.5 mg/L

e — Silica: < 2 mg/L

e Other heavy metals: < 0.1 mg/L
Adapted from:
Canadian Standards Association. ‘Decontamination of Reusable Medical Devices’. CAN/CSA-Z314.8-08. 2008.
Canadian Standards Association. ‘Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by the Steam Process’. CAN/CSA
Z314.3-09. 2009
Canadian Standards Association. ‘Special Requirements for Heating, Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC)
Systems in Health Care Facilities’. CAN/CSA Z314.2-10. 2010.
The American Institute of Architects Academy of Architecture for Health. ‘Guidelines for Design and Construction
of Hospital and Health Care Facilities’. 2006 edition.

Appendix D: Sample Audit Checklist for Reprocessing of Medical
Equipment/Devices

NOTE: This sample checklist is provided to assist health care settings in developing their own audit tools.
Purpose:
All medical equipment/devices used in health care settings in Ontario are to be reprocessed in accordance with
both the Ministry of Health and Long Term Care’s “Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All
Health Care Settings”, Public Health Agency of Canada infection control guidelines and current CSA standards.
Audits should be carried out on a regular basis (e.g., annually).
Responsibility:
Each physician Program Head and/or department manager is responsible to verify that all medical
equipment/devices reprocessed in the area for which he/she is responsible are being reprocessed according to
the MOHLTC’s ‘Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings’. Audit results
should be reviewed by the sterile processing department and the reprocessing committee.
Department/Area to be Audited:

Item Yes No Partial Comments

Reprocessing occurs in the area

(if no — sign off, checklist is complete)

Single-use medical equipment/devices are not

reprocessed
ome

Equipment/devices are cleaned using an enzymatic

cleaner prior to reprocessing

Cleaning is done in a separate area from where the

instrument will be used (i.e., designated dirty area)

Personal protective equipment is worn for cleaning and

decontamination (eye protection, mask, gown and

gloves)

Equipment/devices are subjected to high-level

disinfection according to manufacturer’s instructions,

using an approved high-level disinfectant

High-level disinfectant concentration is checked daily es es

High-level disinfectant is not kept for more than 2 weeks,

even if test strips indicate concentration is effective

Quality Control on test strips is carried out as per

manufacturer’s instructions

Test strip bottle is dated when opened a

Test strips are not used past the manufacturer’s expiry

date
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 78

Item Yes No Partial Comments
a
control
Fa
disinfection
Log is kept of dates when high-level disinfectant is
Fn
ume | fT
when high-level disinfectant is changed
Fa
program
| Logiskept ofall preventivemaintenance | | |
ES
reprocessor malfunction
sme
Fa
sterilization process
| Bowie Dick for high-vacuum sterilizerisdonedaily | | | |
Ein
run
| Logiskept of physical parameters ||P
area | ft |
(each type of cycle i.e., USS, long loads)
| Logiskept ofbiological indicatorresuts | | | |
Soe | TT
the positive test is investigated
| Sterilizer has a preventive maintenance program | | | |
| Logiskept ofpreventivemaintenance | | | |
Fe
biologic monitor
| Indicator tape is used on outside each wrapped package | | | |
Pil
package
| Logiskeptofeachloadanditemsinload | | |
Seema | ft | |
equipment/devices are used
| IflUSSis used, alogiskeptofsteriieruse | | | |
seitctoeememmmm || ||
client/patient/resident’s chart along with rationale for
use
| Alllogs are tobe retained according tofacilitypolicy | | | |
Eres
manner to keep them clean and dry
There a process in place that clearly identifies a non-
Sposa
reprocessed
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 79

Item Yes No Partial Comments

Manager/purchaser is aware of purchasing policy for all

medical equipment/devices requiring reprocessing

There are explicit written reprocessing instructions from

the manufacturer for each equipment/device to be

reprocessed

There are written policies and procedures for

reprocessing that are compatible with current published

reprocessing standards and guidelines.

Manager and staff are educated on how to reprocess

medical equipment/devices when:

e First employed

e ~=Minimum of annually

e Following any authorized change in process

e When new reprocessing equipment is purchased

e When new medical equipment/devices are

purchased

Managers and staff have completed a recognized

certification course in reprocessing or there is a plan to

obtain this qualification within 5 years

There is an audit and follow up process in place for

ongoing evaluation of reprocessing. Appropriate

departments and Infection Prevention and Control are

notified when follow up is required.

There is compliance with the Occupational Health and

Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1 and associated Regulations

including the Health Care and Residential Facilities - O.

Reg. 67/93 Amended to O. Reg. 631/05
Checklist Auditor: Date:
Printname: Dept:
Position:
Adapted from:
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 80

Appendix E: Sample Program Audit Tool for Endoscope Reprocessing
NOTE: This audit tool provides the program elements required for reprocessing endoscopes, to assist health care settings to develop their own
audit tools and task lists for endoscope reprocessing procedures.
Program Element Specific Procedure Yes / M.R.P. | Comment / Strategy for
No/ Improvement
Or
N.A.
1. Comply with endoscope A. Endoscope is wiped and flushed immediately
manufacturer's following procedure.
recommendations for
. B. Debris collected in the endoscope is removed
cleaning.
(e.g., brushing).
C. Debris collected on the endoscope is removed
(surface cleaning).
E. The endoscope is visually inspected to verify
effective operation.
2. Verify that endoscope can | A. There is documentation from endoscope
be reprocessed in site’s manufacturer confirming compatibility of each
automated endoscope scope with AER.
reprocessor (AER).
B. There is documentation from AER manufacturer
confirming testing of individual endoscope in
the facility’s system.
C. Specific steps in reprocessing have been verified
with the endoscope manufacturer before
reprocessing endoscope in AER.
3. Compare manufacturers’ A. Conflicts between the reprocessing instructions
instructions and resolve provided by the AER manufacturer and those
conflicts. provided by the endoscope manufacturer are
identified and resolved.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 81

Program Element Specific Procedure Yes / M.R.P. | Comment / Strategy for
No/ Improvement
Or
N.A.
Adhere to endoscope A. Manual procedures are in place for endoscopes
manufacturer’s not compatible with the AER.
instructions for manual . . |
oo. B. There is compliance with the endoscope
reprocessing in the | |
i manufacturer’s recommendations for hospital-
absence of specific 7
we . approved chemical disinfectant.
technical information on
AER reprocessing.
5. Reprocessing protocol A. All channels of reprocessed endoscopes are
incorporates a final drying flushed with alcohol followed by purging with
step. air.
B. Endoscopes are stored in a manner that
minimized the likelihood of contamination or
collection / retention of moisture.
Staff adhere to facility’s A. There is written confirmation that the AER‘s
procedures for preparing processes are applicable to each specific
endoscope for endoscope model.
client/patient/resident. . .
B. Endoscope-specific reprocessing instructions
from the AER manufacturer are correctly
implemented.
C. Written, device-specific reprocessing
instructions for every endoscope model are
available to reprocessing staff.
D. Written policies and procedures for the
reprocessing system are available to
reprocessing staff.
7. Comprehensive and A. New reprocessing staff receive thorough
intensive training is orientation in all procedures.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 82

Program Element Specific Procedure Yes / M.R.P. | Comment / Strategy for
No/ Improvement
Or
N.A.
provided to all staff B. Competency is maintained by periodic (annual)
assigned to reprocessing hands on training with every endoscope model
endoscopes. and AER used in the facility.
C. Competency is documented following
supervision of skills and expertise with all
procedures.
D. Frequent reminders and strict warnings are
provided to reprocessing staff regarding
adherence to written procedures.
E. There is additional training with documented
competency for new endoscope or AER models.
A comprehensive quality A. There are periodic visual inspections (e.g.,
control program is in monthly) of the cleaning and disinfecting
place. procedures.
B. There is a scheduled and documented
endoscope preventive maintenance program.
C. There is a documented preventive maintenance
program for AERs.
D. There is a documented preventive maintenance
program for all reprocessing system filters.
F. Chemical germicide effectiveness level is
monitored and recorded in a logbook.
G. There are records documenting the use of each
AER, which include the operator identification,
client/patient/resident’s chart record number,
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 83

Program Element Specific Procedure Yes / M.R.P. | Comment / Strategy for
No/ Improvement
Or
N.A.
physician code, endoscope serial # and the type
of procedure.
H. There are records documenting the serial # of
endoscopes leaving the endoscope reprocessing
area (e.g., repairs, loaners, O.R.)
|. There is a surveillance system that detects
clusters of infections /pseudoinfections
associated with endoscopic procedures.
Staff adhere to Routine A. Correct hand hygiene technique is
Practices. demonstrated.
B. There is compliance with procedures for wearing
clean, non-sterile gloves.
C. PPE (masks, eye protection, gown/plastic apron)
is worn during procedures and
client/patient/resident — care activities that are
likely to generate splashes or sprays.
D. Appropriate PPE is worn during endoscope
cleaning and reprocessing.
E. Heavily soiled and wet linen is placed into a
waterproof bag prior to depositing in linen
hamper
G. Staff are knowledgeable regarding protocol for
follow-up for blood / body fluid exposure.
10. | Endoscope reprocessing H. All procedures are in compliance with the
policies and physical space Occupational Health and Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990,
are in compliance with c.0.1 and associated Regulations including the
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 84

Program Element Specific Procedure Yes / M.R.P. | Comment / Strategy for
No/ Improvement
Or
N.A.
workplace regulations and Health Care and Residential Facilities - O. Reg.
standards. 67/93 Amended to O. Reg. 631/05.
Adapted from:
Kingston General Hospital, Kingston, Ontario (Infection Control Manual)
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 85

Appendix F: Sample Observational Audit Tool/ User Task List for
Cleaning, Disinfection and/or Sterilization of Flexible
Endoscopes

NOTE: This tool is a sample designed for competency verification of endoscope reprocessing staff through
observation and is provided to assist health care settings in developing their own audit tools. It may also be used
as a task check list by reprocessing staff.

Leak Testing v Comments

Wear appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE).

Place reusable valves and irrigation ports and removable parts into

enzymatic cleaner.

Perform leakage testing in the decontamination area, prior to

reprocessing each endoscope.

Connect the leakage tester connector to the output socket on the MU-1

or light source/water resistant cap.

Attach the leakage tester’s connector to venting connector (on cap

where applicable) and ensure connection is made.

Manipulate the angulation knobs to check for potential leaks.

Disconnect the leakage tester from the air supply and allow the

endoscope to depressurize.

Dry the leakage tester connector cap.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 86

Manual Cleaning v Comments
Prepare enzymatic cleaner as per manufacturer’s instructions with
regard to dilution rate, temperature and time.
Completely immerse the entire endoscope in freshly prepared
enzymatic cleaner in basin or sink.
Verify that instrument is totally immersed during entire cleaning process
to prevent splashing or aerosolization.
Verify that the bending section is straight so brushing does not damage
endoscope.
Clean the exterior of the endoscope with a soft brush or lint free cloth.
Brush biopsy/suction channel in the insertion tube with the appropriate
sized channel cleaning brush for the endoscope until all debris is
removed.
Continue brushing biopsy/suction channel with channel cleaning brush
until all visible debris is removed. Clean brush in enzymatic cleaner each
time brush is passed through channel.
Brush suction valve housing and instrument channel port with channel
opening brush until all debris is removed.
Attach a 30ml. syringe to the adapter and send enzymatic cleaner into
the channels at least three times.
Soak the endoscope in the enzymatic cleaner as per manufacturer’s
instructions to ensure proper contact time for the enzymatic cleaner.
Brush and flush the valves and removable parts until all debris is
removed.
Perform the final rinses in clear water followed by air purges using 30
ml. syringes.
Thoroughly dry the exterior of the endoscope and all removable parts
using a clean lint free cloth.
Inspect the endoscope for residual debris and repeat the manual
cleaning process if debris remains.
Prepare compatible valves, removable parts and cleaning brush prior to
HLD or ETO sterilization.
Prepare endoscope for HLD or ETO sterilization.

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 87

Manual Disinfection v Comments
Test the HLD dilution as per facility protocol.
Using a 30 cc syringe flush the HLD solution to purge air from all
channels.
Flush air through the endoscope channels using adapters (suction
cleaning adapters).
Rinse the endoscope and flush all channels with sterile/potable water as
per manufacturer’s instructions.
Perform a channel air flush followed by an alcohol and an air purge. Dry
the endoscope with a lint free cloth.
Manipulate angulation knobs to test scope flexibility. Ensure optical
clarity of telescope.
Send accessories, e.g., biopsy brushes, for steam sterilization.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 88

Automated Disinfection v Comments
If applicable, test the HLD dilution as per facility protocol.
Properly place the endoscope, valves, cleaning brush and removable
parts in the chamber (Note: Monitor endoscope stacking).
Attach the endoscope connectors/adapters to the AER.
Run the AER and ensure the endoscope is soaked in HLD solution for
the recommended time and temperature.
Remove the endoscope promptly after the final cycle has been
completed.
Sign off that all AER parameters have been met.
Perform a channel air flush followed by an alcohol and an air purge. Dry
the endoscope with a lint free cloth.
Record scope number and AER number in client/patient/resident
record. Record endoscope number in AER logbook with date.
Manipulate angulation knobs to test scope flexibility. Ensure optical
clarity of telescope.
Dry for ETO sterilization where required.
Send accessories, e.g., biopsy brushes, for steam sterilization.
Preparation for ETO Sterilization v Comments
Attach ETO cap to venting connector.
Seal, wrap and label package for ETO gas sterilization according to
facility protocol.
Sterilize according to ETO parameters.
Aerate following manufacturer’s instructions.
Store on shelf.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 89

Handling Vv Comments

Ensure that the insertion tube is not coiled too tightly when handling

the endoscope.

Transport the endoscope using both hands.

Storage Vv Comments

Complete audit procedure before storage.

Remove all valves and removable parts from the endoscope to prevent

the retention of moisture.

Hang the endoscope with the insertion tube and light guide tube placed

vertical (support the body).
Employee: ee
Auditor: ee
Date: ee
Adapted from:
Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre and from the Carsen Medical Imaging Group
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 90

Appendix G: Advantages and Disadvantages of Currently Available Reprocessing Options
Sterilization
MANUFACTURERS’ RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRODUCT, CONCENTRATION AND EXPOSURE TIME MUST BE FOLLOWED
PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
Mercere fe Nerecespons Fs
™ — es ee
Dry Heat e Anhydrous oil e = Mechanical — each cycle/load e No corrosive or e Lengthy cycle due to slowness of
Gravity convection e Powders, creams e ~~ Chemical — each pack rusting effect on heating and penetration
Mechanical e = Glass e Biological — daily (Bacillus instruments e High temperatures may be
convection e Foot care equipment atrophaeus spores) e Reaches surfaces of deleterious to material
e Heat tolerant instruments that e Limited packing materials
equipment/devices cannot be e Temperature and exposure times
disassembled vary, depending on article being
Temperatures — time e Inexpensive sterilized
171°C — 60 min
160°C — 120 min
149°C — 150 min
141°C — 180 min
121°C — 12 hours
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 91

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
STERILIZATION Critical equipment/devices Effective sterilization must be Completely kills all
aes monitored forms of microbial life
Some semicritical . .
equipment/devices Including /spores
Ethylene Oxide e Heat sensitive @ = ~=Mechanical — each cycle/load e Not harmful to heat- e Expensive
(EtO) gas equipment/devices e Chemical — each pack sensitive and lensed e = Toxic to humans
e —_Lensed instruments that e Biological — each cycle/load instruments e Requires monitoring of residual
require sterilization (Bacillus atrophaeus spores) gas levels in environment
e Requires aeration of sterilized
EtO concentration based on Routine testing shall include a products prior to use
manufacturer’s instructions. biological indicator placed in the e Lengthy cycle required to
Temperature — variable centre of each load to be achieve sterilization and aeration
Humidity — 50% sterilized, and a chemical indicator e — Highly flammable and explosive
Time — extended processing time in each pack. and highly reactive with other
(several hours) chemicals
A rapid readout biologic al e Causes structural damage to
indicator is available (4 hours). some medical
equipment/devices
Vapourized e Heat- and moisture-sensitive e Not harmful to heat- e §=Contraindicated for use on
Hydrogen Peroxide equipment/devices and moisture- liquids, linens, powders cellulose
sensitive items materials
Sterilization in 55 minutes e Safe forenvironment | e Not useful for long lumens
e ~=Non-toxic
e Rapid (55 minutes)
e Heat- and moisture-sensitive e Safe forenvironment | e Limited data on clinical use
equipment/devices including e No aeration needed
metal and plastic instruments
Sterilization takes 4 hours or more
at 30 - 35°C
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 92

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
STERILIZATION Critical equipment/devices Effective sterilization must be Completely kills all
aes monitored forms of microbial life
Some semicritical . .
equipment/devices Including /spores
Immediate Use e Should be used only in an e = Mechanical — each cycle/load Not recommended e — If medical equipment/devices
Steam Sterilization emergency e ~~ Chemical — each pack are used before the results of
(“flash e Never use for implantable e Biological — daily (G. biologic monitors are known,
sterilization”) equipment/devices stearothermophilus spores) personnel must record which
equipment/devices were used
Sterilization of unwrapped objects | Testing should include each type for specific
at 132°C for 3 minutes at 27-28 of cycle and load configuration clients/patients/residents, so
Ibs. pressure. (e.g., open tray, rigid container, that they can be followed if the
single wrapper) to be used that load was not processed properly
day. e — Difficult to monitor
e — Efficacy will be impaired if all the
One biological indicator and a necessary parameters are not
chemical indicator shall be placed properly met
in a perforated or mesh bottom e — Sterility cannot be maintained if
surgical tray of appropriate size the medical equipment/device is
for the sterilizer to be tested. The not wrapped
test tray shall be placed on the e — Effectiveness is impaired if the
bottom shelf of an otherwise medical equipment/device is
empty sterilizer. contaminated with organic
matter
Formaldehyde e Limited use asa e Biologic al indicators are not e = Active in the e = Toxic
chemisterilant available presence of organic e = Carcinogenic
e Sometimes used to reprocess e Concentration must be materials e = Strong irritant
hemodialyzers monitored e ~Pungent odour
e Gaseous form used to e Cannot be monitored for sterility
decontaminate laboratory
safety cabinets
—
sterilizers
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 93

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
STERILIZATION Critical equipment/devices Effective sterilization must be Completely kills all
aes monitored forms of microbial life
Some semicritical . .
equipment/devices Including /spores
Glutaraldehyde e May be used on metals, e Exposure time and e Not harmful to heat- e = Toxic, sensitizing irritant
(2.5%-3.5%) plastics, rubber, temperature must be sensitive e Need proper ventilation and
equipment/devices with lens maintained equipment/devices closed containers- ceiling limit
cement e Monitors are available for pH e Does not coagulate 0.05 ppm
e May use on heat sensitive and dilution concentration protein e Handling provides opportunities
equipment/devices e Biological indicators are not for contamination
available e Requires copious rinsing with
Sterilization may be accomplished sterile water
in 10 hours at 20°C with some Concentration is monitored using e Unable to monitor sterility
products. Refer to product label test strips provided by the product e Lengthy process (6-12 hours)
for time and temperature manufacturer. Testing must be e — Shelf life of 14 days once mixed
required to achieve sterilization. done at least daily.
During reuse, the concentration may
Sterilized equipment/devices must | Product is time limited following drop as dilution of the product occurs
be rinsed with sterile water to activation, usually maximum 14
remove all residual chemical. days. During reuse, the
concentration may drop as
Sterilized equipment/devices must | dilution of the product occurs.
be handled in a manner that Chemical test strips are available
prevents contamination from for determining whether an
process through storage to use. effective concentration of active
ingredients is present despite
repeated use and dilution.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 94

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
STERILIZATION Critical equipment/devices Effective sterilization must be Completely kills all
aes monitored forms of microbial life
Some semicritical . .
equipment/devices Including /spores
Hydrogen e Heat sensitive e Biological indicators are not e Safe forenvironment | e  Contraindicated for use on
Peroxide, equipment/devices available e Non-toxic copper, brass, carbon-tipped
Enhanced Action e Chemical — test kits to e = Rapid devices and anodised aluminum
Formulation monitor the concentration e Inexpensive e Cannot monitor for sterility
2% | 6 hours at 20°C (refer to product are available from the e Active in the
label for time and temperature). manufacturer and must be presence of organic
7% | 20 minutes at 20°C (refer to used for each load materials
product label for time and
temperature).
Hydrogen peroxide | e Heat sensitive Follow manufacturer’s e Low heat good for e = Special wraps and trays required
gas plasma equipment/devices instructions heat sensitive e — Limitations on length and lumens
e Chemical — each pack equipment/devices of medical equipment/devices
Sterility is achieved after 75 e Biological — daily (Bacillus e = Rapid that can be effectively sterilized
minutes at 50°C. stearothermophilus spores) e Safe forenvironment | e Long (12") narrow lumens
(water and oxygen (1/8"/0.38 cm) require a booster
end products) e Cannot sterilize materials which
e Non-toxic absorb liquids (e.g. linen, gauze,
e Lack of corrosion to cellulose/paper)
metals and other e Not approved for flexible
materials (except endoscopes
nylon)
e Compatible with
most medical
equipment/devices
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 95

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
STERILIZATION Critical equipment/devices Effective sterilization must be Completely kills all
aes monitored forms of microbial life
Some semicritical . .
equipment/devices Including /spores
Hydrogen peroxide | e Heat sensitive e Biological indicators are not e Less toxic than other e = Contraindicated for use on
liquid equipment/devices (e.g. eye available chemical sterilants copper, zinc, brass, aluminium
(6-25%) equipment) e Concentration must be e Safe forenvironment | e Store in cool place, protect from
e Costly equipment/devices monitored e = Rapid light
that may be lost in transit e — Limitations on length and lumens
of medical equipment/devices
Sterility is achieved after 6 hours. that can be effectively sterilized
e Cannot monitor for sterility
|_Microwave ovens | Notacceptable | None | NNotacceptable |
Peracetic acid e Heat sensitive immersible e = Mechanical e = Rapid e Monitoring of efficacy of
(0.2%) equipment/devices (e.g. - diagnostic cycle should be e Automated sterilization cycle with spore
endoscopes, dental and performed each day to ensure e Leaves no residue strips is questionable
surgical instruments) that all mechanical e Effective in presence e Can be used for immersible
components are functioning of organic matter instruments only
Sterilizes in 12 minutes at 50-56°C properly e = Sporicidal at low e = Corrosive
(time and temperature controlled - with each cycle/load there temperatures e Incompatibility with some
by cycle and may vary due to are printouts that document e Safe for environment materials (e.g., aluminum)
water pressure, incoming water the parameters of the cycle e Unstable, particularly when
temperature, or filter status). (e.g. temperature, exposure diluted
time, etc.)
e Chemical — each pack In vapour form, PAA is volatile, has a
e Biological — daily (G. pungent odour, is toxic and is a fire
stearothermophilus spores) and explosion hazard.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 96

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
STERILIZATION Critical equipment/devices Effective sterilization must be Completely kills all
aes monitored forms of microbial life
Some semicritical . .
equipment/devices Including /spores
Steam Sterilization First choice for critical e ~=Pre-vacuum sterilizers — e Inexpensive e Cannot use for heat or moisture
equipment/devices include air removal test daily e = Rapid sensitive equipment/devices
Small table top e Heat tolerant instruments and before first cycle of the day, in | e — Efficient e Unsuitable for anhydrous oils,
sterilizers accessories an empty sterilizer with no e Non-toxic powders, lensed instruments,
Gravity e Linen dry cycle e Good penetration heat and moisture sensitive
displacement e — Liquids @ = ~=Mechanical — each cycle/load materials
sterilizers e Foot care equipment e Chemical — each pack e Some tabletop sterilizers lack a
High-speed e Biological — daily and on every drying cycle
vacuum Raised pressure (preset by type of cycle to be used; and
sterilizers manufacturer) to increase with each load of implantable
temperature to 121°C. equipment/devices; Place
biological indicator near the
Time varies with temperature, drain in a fully loaded
type of material and whether the sterilizer (G.
instrument is wrapped or not. stearothermophilus spores).
Steam must be saturated (narrow Loads containing implantable
lumen equipment/devices may devices shall be quarantined until
require prehumidification). the results of the biological
indicator testing are available.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 97

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
HIGH-LEVEL Semicritical Monitoring for dilution is Kills all vegetative Does not kill bacterial spores.
DISINFECTION equipment/devices recommended forms of microbial life
(HLD) including bacteria,
viruses, fungi and
Glutaraldehyde e Heat sensitive e Exposure time and e Noncorrosive to e Extremely irritating to skin and
(2 2%) equipment/devices temperature must be metal, plastic, mucous membranes
e —_Lensed instruments that do maintained rubber, lens cements e Need proper ventilation & closed
not require sterilization e Test strips for concentration e Active in presence of containers- ceiling limit 0.05 ppm
e Endoscopes are available from the organic material e — Shelf life shortens when diluted
e Respiratory therapy manufacturer and must be (effective for 14-30 days
equipment used at least daily (preferably depending on formulation)
e Anaesthesia equipment with each load) e During reuse, concentration may
e Fingernail care equipment drop as dilution of the product
used on multiple Product is time limited following occurs
clients/patients/residents activation, usually maximum 14 e  §=Acts asa fixative
days. Chemical test strips are
High-level disinfection is achieved available for determining whether
after at least 20 minutes at 20°C. an effective concentration of
Refer to product label for time active ingredients is present.
and temperature required to During reuse, the concentration
achieve high-level disinfection. may drop as dilution of the
product occurs.
Hydrogen peroxide | e Semicritical equipment used Not currently available e = Strong oxidant e Must be stored in cool place,
(2 6%) for home health care e Rapid action protect from light
e — Disinfection of soft contact e Safe for the e —Contraindicated for use on
lenses environment copper, brass, carbon-tipped
e Low cost devices and aluminium
Achieves high-level disinfection
after at least 30 minutes.
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 98

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
HIGH-LEVEL Semicritical Monitoring for dilution is Kills all vegetative Does not kill bacterial spores.
DISINFECTION equipment/devices recommended forms of microbial life
(HLD) including bacteria,
viruses, fungi and
Ortho- e Endoscopy e Test strips for concentration e Superior penetration e — Stains protein, including hands,
phthalaldehyde equipment/devices are available from the e Rapid activity requiring gloves and gown for
(OPA) (contraindicated for manufacturer and must be e Active in presence of use
(0.55%) cystoscopes) used at least daily (preferably organic materials e Expensive
e Heat sensitive with each load) e =Non-irritating vapour
equipment/devices e Does not require Contraindicated for cystoscopes due
activation or dilution to risk of sensitization and
Achieves high-level disinfection anaphylaxis”
after at least 10 minutes at 20°C.
Pasteurization e Respiratory therapy e The process must be e Rapid, simple, e Dry well & store carefully to
equipment monitored with mechanical moderate cost prevent contamination
e Anaesthesia equipment temperature gauges and e = Alternative to ¢ — Difficult to monitor efficacy of
timing mechanisms for each chemicals the process
Achieves high-level disinfection at load, with a paper printout e Non-toxic e ~=Preventive maintenance
71°C (160°F) for 30 min. record e Can be used for required
e Water temperature within the some plastics
pasteurizer should be verified
weekly by manually
measuring the cycle water
temperature
e Cycle time should be verified
manually and recorded daily
e Daily cleaning of pasteurizing
equipment is required
following the manufacturer’s
instructions
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 99

MANUFACTURERS’ RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRODUCT, CONCENTRATION AND EXPOSURE TIME MUST BE FOLLOWED

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
Hydrogen Peroxide | ¢ Heat sensitive Test kits to monitor the e Safe forenvironment | e  Contraindicated for use on
Enhanced Action equipment/devices concentration are available from e Non-toxic copper, brass, carbon-tipped
Formulation e Delicate equipment/devices the manufacturer and must be e = Active in the devices and anodised aluminium
(2%) used with each load. presence of organic

Newer formulations achieve high- materials

level disinfection in 8 minutes at e = Rapid

20°C (refer to product label for e Inexpensive

time and temperature).

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 100

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
LOW-LEVEL Noncritical medical Monitoring not required Inactivates vegetative Not able to kill fungi, non-
DISINFECTION equipment/devices bacteria and enveloped virus, mycobacteria,
So Sea or elie
Alcohols e External surfaces of some Monitoring not required e Non-toxic e — Evaporates quickly - not a good
(60-95%) equipment (e.g. e Low cost surface disinfectant
stethoscopes) e Rapid action e Evaporation may diminish
e =Noncritical equipment used e ~=Non-staining concentration
for home health care e Noresidue e Flammable - store in a cool well
e — Effective on clean ventilated area; refer to Fire
Used as a skin antiseptic equipment/devices Code restrictions for storage of
that can be large volumes of alcohol
Disinfection is achieved after 10 immersed e  Coagulates protein; a poor
minutes of contact. cleaner
e May dissolve lens mountings
Observe fire code restrictions for e Hardens and swells plastic tubing
storage of alcohol. e Harmful to silicone; causes
brittleness
e = May harden rubber or cause
deterioration of glues
e Inactivated by organic material
e §=Contraindicated in the Operating
Room
Chlorines e Hydrotherapy tanks, exterior Monitoring not required e Low cost e Corrosive to metals
surfaces of dialysis e Rapid action e Inactivated by organic material;
equipment, cardiopulmonary e Readily available in for blood spills, blood must be
training manikins, non hospital settings removed prior to disinfection
environmental surfaces e Irritant to skin and mucous
e =Noncritical equipment used membranes
for home health care e Should be used immediately
e Blood spills once diluted
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 101

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
LOW-LEVEL Noncritical medical Monitoring not required Inactivates vegetative Not able to kill fungi, non-
DISINFECTION equipment/devices bacteria and enveloped virus, mycobacteria,
So Sea or cele
Dilution of Household Bleach e Use in well-ventilated areas
e Must be stored in closed
Undiluted: 5.25% sodium containers away from ultraviolet
hypochlorite, 50,000 ppm light & heat to prevent
available chlorine deterioration
e Stains clothing and carpets
Blood spill — major: dilute 1:10
with tap water to achieve 0.5%
or 5,000 ppm chlorine
Blood spill — minor: dilute 1:100
with tap water to achieve
0.05% or 500 ppm chlorine
Surface cleaning, soaking of items:
dilute 1:50 with tap water to
achieve 0.1% or 1,000 ppm
chlorine
Hydrogen Peroxide | e Isolation room surfaces Monitoring not required, however | e Safe forenvironment | e  Contraindicated for use on
Enhanced Action e = Clinic and procedure room test kits are available from the e Non-toxic copper, brass, carbon-tipped
Formulation surfaces manufacturer e Rapid action devices and anodised aluminum
0.5% e = Available in a wipe
Low-level disinfection is achieved e Active in the
(7% solution after 5 minutes of contact at 20°C. presence of organic
diluted 1:16) materials
e Excellent cleaning
ability due to
detergent properties
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 102

PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
LOW-LEVEL Noncritical medical Monitoring not required Inactivates vegetative Not able to kill fungi, non-
DISINFECTION equipment/devices bacteria and enveloped virus, mycobacteria,
So Sea or cele
Hydrogen peroxide | ¢ Noncritical equipment used Monitoring not required e Low cost e = Contraindicated for use on
3% for home health care e Rapid action copper, zinc, brass, aluminum
e Floors, walls, furnishings e = Safe for the e Store in cool place, protect from
environment light
Disinfection is achieved with a 3%
solution after 10 minutes of
contact.
lodophors e Hydrotherapy tanks Monitoring not required e Rapid action e Corrosive to metal unless
(Non-antiseptic e Thermometers e Non-toxic combined with inhibitors
formulations) e Hard surfaces and equipment e Inactivated by organic materials
that do not touch mucous e May stain fabrics and synthetic
membranes (e.g. IV poles, materials
wheelchairs, beds, call bells)
DO NOT use antiseptic iodophors
as hard surface disinfectants.
e Floors, walls and furnishings Monitoring not required e Leaves residual filmon | Do not use in nurseries
e Hard surfaces and equipment environmental Not recommended for use on food
that do not touch mucous surfaces contact surfaces
membranes (e.g. IV poles, e Commercially e May be absorbed through skin or
wheelchairs, beds, call bells) available with added by rubber
detergents to e = May be toxic if inhaled
DO NOT use phenolics in provide one-step e = Corrosive
nurseries. cleaning and e Some synthetic flooring may
disinfecting become sticky with repetitive
e — Slightly broader use
spectrum of activity
than QUATs
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 103

MANUFACTURERS’ RECOMMENDATIONS FOR PRODUCT, CONCENTRATION AND EXPOSURE TIME MUST BE FOLLOWED
PROCESS OPTION | USES/COMMENTS | MONITORING | ADVANTAGES/COMMENTS | DISADVANTAGES/COMMENTS
LOW-LEVEL Noncritical medical Monitoring not required Inactivates vegetative Not able to kill fungi, non-
DISINFECTION equipment/devices bacteria and enveloped virus, mycobacteria,
(LLD) enveloped viruses or bacterial spores
Quaternary e Floors, walls and furnishings Monitoring not required e Non corrosive, non- e NOT to be used to disinfect
ammonium e Blood spills prior to toxic, low irritant instruments
compounds disinfection e Good cleaning ability, | ¢ Limited use as disinfectant
(QUATs) usually have because of narrow microbicidal
DO NOT use QUATs to disinfect detergent properties spectrum
instruments. e Rinsing not required ¢ Diluted solutions may support
e May be used on food the growth of microorganisms
preparation surfaces e = May be neutralized by various
materials (e.g. gauze)
Adapted from:
1. Center for Disease Control and Prevention’s ‘Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008’ [available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhgp/pdf/guidelines/Disinfection Nov 2008.pdf].”°
2. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Disinfection and sterilization: An overview. AJIC 2013;41:52-55.°
3. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Sterilization, High-Level Disinfection, and Environmental Cleaning. Infect Dis Clin N Am 25 (2011): 45-76.°”
Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 104

Appendix H: Resources for Education and Training

Resources for Infection Prevention and Control

1. Organizations and Publications

Canadian Standards Association (CSA)
Source for national standards in sterilization and sterilizing equipment.
http://www.csa.ca/cm/home

Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC)
PIDAC was established by the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long-term Care and provides advice on
protocols to prevent and control infectious diseases, emergency preparedness for an infectious disease
outbreak, and immunization programs. They are in the process of publishing a number of best practice
guidelines.
http://www.publichealthontario.ca/en/BrowseByTopic/InfectiousDiseases/PIDAC/Pages/PIDAC.aspx

Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
Public Health Agency of Canada. Infection Control Guidelines. Hand Hygiene Practices in Health Care
Settings, 2013.
http://www.chica.org/pdf/2013_ PHAC Hand%20Hygiene-EN.pdf
Public Health Agency of Canada. Infection Control Guidelines. Infection Prevention and Control Best
Practices for Long Term Care, Home and Community Care including Health Care Offices and Ambulatory
Clinics, 2007.
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/amr-ram/ipcbp-pepci/index-eng.php
Public Health Agency of Canada. Infection Control Guidelines . Infection Prevention and Control
Guideline for Flexible Gastrointestinal Endoscopy and Flexible Bronchoscopy, 2011.
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/nois-sinp/guide/endo/index-eng.php

U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Infection Control Guidelines.
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/guidelines.html

PubMed
PubMed is the National Library of Medicine's search service that provides access to over 15 million
citations in biomedical and life sciences journals.
http:/Awww.pubmed.com

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 105

2. Professional Associations

CHICA - Canada. Community and Hospital Infection Control Association - Canada
National association for infection prevention and control professionals in Canada. Offers a number of
Position Statements and expertise in infection prevention and control.
http://www.chica.org/links position.php

APIC- Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology (U.S.)
Association for Professionals in Infection Control and Epidemiology (APIC). APIC Text of Infection Control
and Epidemiology, 2005 Edition. Available for purchase from APIC online store.
http://www.apic.org/APICStore/Products/Product?id=SLSTXTO9

The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario
Infection Control in Physician’s Office, 2004.
http://www.cpso.on.ca/policies/guidelines/default.aspx?id=1766

Resources for Training in Reprocessing

Central Service Association of Ontario (CSAO)
Provincial association of hospital central service workers dedicated to standardization of central service
practices in hospitals across the province. Offers the “Central Service Techniques Course” at chapters
around the province.
http://www.csao.net/education/index.php

Algonquin College (Ottawa)
Offers course on Sterile Supply Processing.
http://xweb.algonquincollege.com/courseDetail.aspx?id=HLT0151

Centennial College (Toronto)
Offers certificate course in processing:
Introduction to Sterile Supply: htip://www.centennialcollege.ca/cgi-bin/FM.cgi?cecrs=SSPP-110
Sterile Supply Processing: http://www.centennialcollege.ca/cgi-bin/FM.cgi?cecert=7920

Fanshawe College (London)
Offers Sterile Processing Technician certificate course.
http://www.fanshawec.ca/continuing-education/health-care/sterile-processing

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 106

IV. References

1. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA-Z314.3-09 Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by
the Steam Process. Rexdale, Ont.: Canadian Standards Association; 2009.

2. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA-Z314.0-13 Medical Device Reprosessing - General
requirements. Rexdale, Ont.: Canadian Standards Association; 2013.

3. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA Z317.13-07 Infection Control during Construction, Renovation
and Maintenance of Health Care Facilities. Mississauga, Ont.: Canadian Standards Association; 2007.

4. Ontario. Occupational Health and Safety Act and WHMIS regulation : Revised Statutes of Ontario, 1990,
chapter 0.1, Reg. 860 Amended to O. Reg. 36/93 Toronto, Ontario: Ontario Ministry of Labour
Operations Division2001. Report No.: 0779405617.

5. Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC). Best Practices for Infection Prevention and
Control Programs in Ontario In All Health Care Settings 2011 [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from:
http://www.oahpp.ca/resources/documents/pidac/PIDAC-
IPC_BP%2O0Infection%20Prevention%20Control English Final 2012-10-03.pdf.

6. Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC). Routine Practices and Additional Precautions
in All Health Care Settings. 2012 [cited February 18, 2012]. Available from:
http://www.oahpp.ca/resources/documents/pidac/RPAP_2012%20Revision ENGLISH 2012-12-

24 FINAL%5B2%5D.pdf.

7. Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC). Best Practices for Hand Hygiene in All Health
Care Settings. 2010 [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from: http://www.oahpp.ca/resources/pidac-
knowledge/best-practice-manuals/hand-hygiene.html.

8. Public Health Ontario. Just Clean Your Hands. Ontario's evidence-based hand hygiene program. Released
2008. [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from: http://www.oahpp.ca/services/jcyh/index.html.

9. Provincial Infectious Diseases Advisory Committee (PIDAC). Best Practices for Environmental Cleaning
for Prevention and Control of Infections in All Health Care Settings. 2012 [cited November 25, 2012].
Available from:
http://www.oahpp.ca/resources/documents/pidac/Environmental%20Cleaning%20BP_ENGLISH_ FINAL
2012-07-15.pdf.

10. Ontario. Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care. Health Protection and Promotion Act: R.S.O. 1990,
chapter H.7. Toronto, Ontario2008 [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from: http://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws statutes 90h07_e.htm.

11. Ontario. Occupational Health and Safety Act. R.S.O. 1990, Chapter 0.1. [cited November 25, 2012].
Available from: http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws statutes 90001 e.htm.

12. Ontario. Occupational Health and Safety Act. Ontario Regulation 474/07. Needle Safety. 2007 [cited
November 25, 2012]. Available from: http://www.e-
laws.gov.on.ca/Download?dDocName=elaws regs 070474 e.

13. Dancer SJ, Stewart M, Coulombe C, Gregori A, Virdi M. Surgical site infections linked to contaminated
surgical instruments. J Hosp Infect. 2012 Aug;81(4):231-8.

14. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA Z314.8-08 Decontamination of Reusable Medical Devices.
Z314.8-08 CC, editor. Mississauga, Ont.: Canadian Standards Association; 2008.

15. Spaulding E, editor. The role of chemical disinfection in the prevention of nosocomial infections.
International Conference on Nosocomial Infections; 1970 1971; Chicago, IL: American Hospital
Association.

16. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA-Z314.22-04 (R2009) Management of Loaned, Shared, and
Leased Medical Devices. Mississauga, Ont.: Canadian Standards Association; 2004.

17. Food and Drugs Act. Medical Devices Regulations, SOR/98-282. 1998 [cited Available from:
http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/f-27/sor-98-282/text.html.

18. Transport Canada. Transportation of Dangerous Goods Act, 1992. 1994 [cited November 25, 2012].
Available from: http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/T-19.01/.

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 107

19. Health Canada. Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in Canada. An infection control guideline. Can Commun
Dis Rep. 2002 Nov;28 Suppl 5:1-84.

20. Public Health Agency of Canada. Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in Canada. Quick reference guide.
2007 [cited Available from: http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/nois-sinp/pdf/cjd-eng.pdf.

21. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Guideline for disinfection and sterilization of prion-contaminated medical
instruments. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2010 Feb;31(2):107-17.

22. Notari S, Moleres FJ, Hunter SB, Belay ED, Schonberger LB, Cali |, et al. Multiorgan detection and
characterization of protease-resistant prion protein in a case of variant CJD examined in the United
States. PLoS One. 2010;5(1):e8765.

23. Health Canada. Infection Control Guidelines: Hand Washing, Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in
Health Care [currently under revision]. Can Commun Dis Rep. 1998 Dec;24 Suppl 8:1-55.

24. Ontario. Regulation for health care and residential facilities, made under the Occupational Health and
Safety Act : Revised Statutes of Ontario, 1990, chapter 0.1 as amended : O. Reg. 67/93. Toronto:
Ontario Ministry of Labour Operations Division; 1995 [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from:
http://www.search.e-laws.gov.on.ca/en/isysquery/06458ea0-c519-47bb-9a5a-
dd170cf36800/7/doc/?search=browseStatutes&context=#hit1.

25. Ontario. Ontario. Occupational Health and Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1: Control of Exposure to
Biological or Chemical Agents, R.R.O. 1990, Regulation 833 Amended to O. Reg. 607/05. [Part 5: Ceiling
Exposure Values (CEV) for Biological and Chemical Agents]. [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from:
http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/source/regs/english/2005/elaws src_regs r05607_e.htm.

26. American National Standards Institute. Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equipment. ANSI/ISEA Z358.1-
2009. 2009.

27. Health Canada. Infection Control Guidelines: Routine practices and additional precautions for preventing
the transmission of infection in health care [under revision]. Can Commun Dis Rep. 1999 Jul;25 Suppl
4:1-142.

28. Ontario Hospital Association and the Ontario Medical Association Joint Communicable Diseases
Surveillance Protocols Committee in collaboration with the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care.
Blood-Borne Diseases Surveillance Protocol for Ontario Hospitals. 2012 [cited January 2, 2013].
Available from:
http://www.oha.com/Services/HealthSafety/Documents/Blood%20Borne%20Diseases%20Protocol%20-
%20Reviewed%20and%20Revised%20November%202012.pdf.

29. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC). Guideline
for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, 2008. 2008 [cited Available from:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/pdf/guidelines/Disinfection Nov_2008.pdf.

30. Whyman CA, McDonald SA, Zoutman D. Unsuspected dilution of glutaraldehyde in an automatic washer
for flexible fibreoptic endoscopes. Can J Infect Control. 1991 Winter;6(4):91-3.

31. Operating Room Nurses Association of Canada (ORNAC). Standards, Guidelines and Position Statements
for Perioperative Registered Nursing Practice. 10th Edition; Revision 1 - December 2011. Section 2:
Infection Prevention and Control.2011.

32. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA-Z314.2-09 Effective Sterilization in Health Care Facilities by
the Ethylene Oxide Process. Rexdale, Ont.: Canadian Standards Association; 2009.

33. The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario. Infection Control in the Physician's Office. 2004 [cited
Available from: http://www.cpso.on.ca/policies/guidelines/default.aspx?id=1766.

34. Rutala WA, Gergen MF, Weber DJ. Evaluation of a rapid readout biological indicator for flash sterilization
with three biological indicators and three chemical indicators. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 1993
Jul;14(7):390-4.

35. Rutala WA, Jones SM, Weber DJ. Comparison of a rapid readout biological indicator for steam
sterilization with four conventional biological indicators and five chemical indicators. Infect Control Hosp
Epidemiol. 1996 Jul;17(7):423-8.

36. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA-Z15882-04 Sterilization of health care products: chemical
indicators - guidance for selection, use and interpretation of results. Mississauga, Ont.: Canadian
Standards Association; 2004.

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 108

37. Ontario. Occupational Health and Safety Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.0.1; Designated Substance - Ethylene Oxide,
R.R.O. 1990, Reg. 840, Amended to O. Reg. 107/04. [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from:
http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/regs/english/elaws regs 900841 e.htm.

38. Environment Canada. Guidelines for the Reduction of Ethylene Oxide Releases from Sterilization
Applications. [cited Available from: http://www.ec.gc.ca/CEPARegistry/guidelines/ethylene oxide.cfm.

39. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI). /mmediate-use steam sterilization.
Multi-society Position Statement on Immediate-Use Steam Sterilization. 2010 [cited May 21, 2013].
Available from: http://www.aami.org/publications/standards/ST79_ Immediate Use Statement.pdf.

40. Multi-society guideline for reprocessing flexible gastrointestinal endoscopes. Gastrointest Endosc. 2003
Jul;58(1):1-8.

41. Public Health Agency of Canada. Infection Prevention and Control Guideline for Flexible Gastrointestinal
Endoscopy and Flexible Bronchoscopy. Public Health Agency of Canada; 2010 [cited Available from:
http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/nois-sinp/guide/endo/index-eng.php.

42. Facility Guidelines Institute. Guidelines for Design and Construction of Health Care Facilities. Facility
Guidelines Institute; 2010 [cited November 25, 2012]. Available from: http://www. fgiguidelines.org/.

43. Ayliffe G. Decontamination of minimally invasive surgical endoscopes and accessories. J Hosp Infect.
2000 Aug;45(4):263-77.

44. Leroy S. Infectious risk of endovaginal and transrectal ultrasonography: systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Hosp Infect. 2013 Feb;83(2):99-106.

45. Riley R, Beanland C, Bos H. Establishing the shelf life of flexible colonoscopes. Gastroenterol Nurs. 2002
May-Jun;25(3):114-9.

46. US Deprtment of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration. 21 CFR Part 872.6730.
Dental devices; endodontic dry heat sterilizer; final rule. Federal Register 1997;62:2903. [cited Available
from: http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cdrh/cfdocs/cfCFR/CFRSearch.cfm ?fr=872.6730.

47. Royal College of Dental Surgeons of Ontario. Infection Prevention and Control in the Dental Office. 2010
[cited Available from: http://www.rcdso.org/pdf/guidelines/InfectionControlVer8.pdf.

48. Kolstad RA. How well does the Chemiclave sterilize handpieces? J Am Dent Assoc. 1998 Jul;129(7):985-
91.

49. McErlane B, Rosebush WJ, Waterfield JD. Assessment of the effectiveness of dental sterilizers using
biological monitors. J Can Dent Assoc. 1992 Jun;58(6):481-3.

50. Kohn WG, Collins AS, Cleveland JL, Harte JA, Eklund KJ, Malvitz DM. Guidelines for infection control in
dental health-care settings--2003. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2003 Dec 19;52(RR-17):1-61.

51. Health Canada. Therapeutic Products Directorate. Reprocessing of Reusable and Single-Use Medical
Devices. Letter to hospital administrators, July 30, 2004. 2004 [cited Available from: http://www.hc-
sc.gc.ca/dhp-mps/md-im/activit/announce-annonce/reprocess_retraitement_let-eng.php.

52. Ontario Hospital Association. Report of OHA's Reuse of Single-Use Medical Devices Ad-hoc Working
Group. Toronto, Ontario: Ontario Hospital Association; 2004 [cited Available from:
http://www.oha.com/Client/OHA/OHA LP4W_Ind_ WebStation.nsf/resources/ReuseofSingleUse_ Medic
al Devices Executive Summary/Sfile/ReuseofSingleUse Medical Devices Executive Summary.pdf.

53. Ontario Hospital Association Bulletin. Reprocessing of Single Use Medical Devices. 2005 [cited

54. Canadian Standards Association. CAN/CSA Z317.2-01 (R2008) Special Requirements for Heating,
Ventilation, and Air Conditioning (HVAC) Systems in Health Care Facilities. Toronto: Canadian Standards
Association; 2001.

55. Hamasuna R, Nose K, Osada Y, Muscarella LF. Correction: high-level disinfection of cystoscopic
equipment with ortho-phthalaldehyde solution [letter]. Journal of Hospital Infection. 2005;61(4):363-4.

56. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Disinfection and sterilization: An overview. Am J Infect Control. 2013 May;41(5
Suppl):S2-5.

57. Rutala WA, Weber DJ. Sterilization, high-level disinfection, and environmental cleaning. Infect Dis Clin
North Am. 2011 Mar;25(1):45-76.

Best Practices for Cleaning, Disinfection and Sterilization in All Health Care Settings | May 2013 109

Public Health Ontario
480 University Avenue, Suite 300
(y=

Toronto, Ontario LO °

M5G 1V2 Ontario _
Agency for Health
Protection and Promotion

647.260.7100 Agence de protection et
de promotion de la santé

communications@oahpp.ca

www.publichealthontario.ca

